+++
title = "01 धर्मक्षेत्रे"

+++
1.1 - 1.19 Dhrtarastra said - Sanjaya said Duryodhana, after viewing the
forces of Pandavas protected by Bhima, and his own forces protected by
Bhisma conveyed his views thus to Drona, his teacher, about the adeacy
of Bhima's forces for conering the Kaurava forces and the inadeacy of
his own forces for victory against the Pandava forces. He was
grief-stricken within. Observing his (Duryodhana's) despondecny, Bhisma,
in order to cheer him, roared like a lion, and then blowing his conch,
made his side sound their conchs and kettle-drums, which made an uproar
as a sign of victory. Then, having heard that great tumult, Arjuna and
Sri Krsna the Lord of all lords, who was acting as the charioteer of
Arjuna, sitting in their great chariot which was powerful enough to
coner the three worlds; blew their divine conchs Srimad Pancajanya and
Devadatta. Then, both Yudhisthira and Bhima blew their respective conchs
separately. That tumult rent asunder the hearts of your sons, led by
Duryodhana. The sons of Dhrtarastra then thought, 'Our cause is almost
lost now itself.' So said Sanjaya to Dhrtarastra who was longing for
their victory. Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: Then, seeing the Kauravas,
who were ready for battle, Arjuna, who had Hanuman, noted for his
exploit of burning Lanka, as the emblem on his flag on his chariot,
directed his charioteer Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord-who is overcome by
parental love for those who take shelter in Him who is the
treasure-house of knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and
splendour, whose sportive delight brings about the origin, sustentation
and dissolution of the entire cosmos at His will, who is the Lord of the
senses, who controls in all ways the senses inner and outer of all,
superior and inferior - by saying, 'Station my chariot in an appropriate
place in order that I may see exactly my enemies who are eager for
battle.'
