+++
title = "18 अन्तवन्त इमे"

+++
2.18 Antavantah etc. The bodies, at the time of their attaining the
unobservable stage, meet their apparent destruction. This would be
impossible if they do not suffer the peculiar destruction, that it to
say they undergo changes every moment. For, it has been said- 'By
observing the dilapidated condition of beings at their last moment, the
loss of newness is very moment is inferred' The same has been said by
the Sage (Vyasa) also as- 'In every being, in every moment, there is
mutual difference between its tiny parts that have different purposes.
But on account of its subtlity, it is not cleary comprehended (MB,
Santi., Moksa. Ch. 308, verse 121). \[In theabove passage\] having
different purposes amounts to say 'because they perform different acts
having their own respective special purposes.; Now, the bodies have
thier end and are ever changing. On the other hand, the Self is
destructionless, because It is incomprehensible. Changing nature belongs
only to the insentient thing which is comprehensible, but not to what is
non-insentient and is exclusively consciousness in nature. Because, it
is not possible \[for one\] to gain an altogether different nature.
Thus, the bodies meet permanently their end and hence they cannot be
lamented for; the Self ever remains without destruction (or without
changing) and hence need not be lamented for. Thus a single krtya-suffix
has been employed on both the senses simultaneously by the sage in the
expression asocyan.
