+++
title = "54 स्थितप्रज्ञस्य का"

+++
2.54 Sthita-prajnasya etc. By the statement 'When the determing faculty
shall stand \[firm in concentration, at that time you shall attain Yoga
- above II, 55\]' it has been \[virtually\] stated there that the
appellation sthita-prajna (man-of-stabilized-intellect) is a
nomenclature signifying man-of-Yoga who is fixed in concentration. Now,
what is the connotation of it, i.e., what is the basis for the usage of
this nomenclature ; For, \[connotation is that\] basing on which a
particular meaning is connoted by words. Does the appellation
sthita-prajna of the man-of-Yoga speak of him through its traditional
(or conventional) force of the word or through its force of etymology ;
This is the first estion. Of course, regarding the traditional force of
the word there is no doubt at all. \[For, it has no such force in it\].
Yet, the present estion is to make the etymological meaning-though it is
already available-clear by explaining the basis for definition of
special nature. The expression sthira-dhih has for its imports both the
expression \[itself\] and its meaning 'the fixed-minded'. Of them, does
the expression sthira-dhih denote that meaning alone which is indicated
by the force of its components; or else does it denote the ascetic also
; This is the second estion. Again, where would that firm-minded
man-of-Yoga abide i.e., what would he practise; or what would his
firmness depend on ; This is the third \[estion\]. And what world he
achieve by practising ; This is the fourth \[estion\]. These four
estions are decided one by one by the Bhagavat \[in the seel\].
