+++
title = "02 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
17.2 Trividha etc. Here the ideas is this :- What is termed scripture is
indeed the one which is not created by the intellect soiled by any
partisan spirit; further it is of the form of the firmness of the
recollection; and it is firmly recollected because of the sovereign
freedom of the awareness; likewise it is also of the nature of fruit
etc., i.e. the nature of the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate purport of
speech, a flow of the pure Self-Consciousness; because of its free
course, it starts from the internal nature of awareness and goes as for
as the external flow, beginning from the subtlest hymn (Om), down to the
series of popular saying well-known in the worldly activities. 'What
\[the sage\] says - 'Also the \[injunctions based on\] remembrance and
the virtuous conduct of the knowers of that \[constitute authority\]'.
(Gautamadharmasutra, I, 2). That scripture, by its own nature,
distinguishes what is to be done and what is not to be done, in order to
teach what is beneficial and what is not beneficial. \[Further\], he
whose heart is very tender by nature, because of the excess of the
Sattva (i.e., godness) - in whatever way he behaves, that has certainly
a scriptural authority. But other person who is made dirty by the Rajas
or the Tamas (i.e., desire and ignorance) does not act rightly, even
while performing what is enjoined in the scriptures. For, he does not
follow the purport (the spirit) of the scripture in its entity. The
scripture (or what is enjoined in the scripture) bears fruits only in
the case of men of the Sattva (goodness) This has been declared by the
scripture itself as : 'He \[alone\] enjoys the fruit of the scripture
(or holy bathing place) whose arms and feet and also mind, learning,
austerity and conduct are controlled properly'. (MB, Aranyaka, Ch. 80,
verse 30). Any other person does not enjoy \[the fruit\], because the
rmains unsubdued \[in his mind\]. Therefore, what is prescribed in the
scripture bears fruit in the case of those who have abandoned desire,
anger and delusion. This is the purport of the present chapter; and it
is being elaborated \[throughout\]. But it is not explained \[in every
place by us (Ag.), because the idea is clear enough. But \[the concerned
verses\] are simply written only to remove doubts regarding the readings
\[of the passages concerned\].
