+++
title = "27 यज्ञे तपसि"

+++
17.23-27 Om etc. upto abhidhiyate. An indication of the Brahman i.e., an
act of facing (or aiming at) the Brahman is made by these three words
viz., OM, TAT and SAT. Of them, Om indicates that 'This purport of the
scriptures is \[to be ;\] accepted as long as one has bodily
connection'. The pronoun TAT, which denotes generality and which is
incapable of denoting exclusively a particular, mentions, as far as the
Brahman is concerned, the absence of intention for fruit. An intention
is not possible without reference to something particular. No doubt
\[TAT\] may denote all particulars \[in general\]. But it would lead to
intending the fruits and the doer-ship with regard to all \[in
general\]. Even then \[the Brahman\] cannot have connection with any
particular fruit. The Vedic word SAT denotes 'prasie'. The act, like
this sacrifice etc., though perormed, truns out to be an act of the Tams
(evil act) if it is performed with the idea, 'It is an evil act'.
Further, what is performed with an intention for a particular fruit is
not praiseworthy, and it causes nothing but bondage. Therefore, those,
who bear in mind, 'This is a thing to be performed' - they are not
fettered, even though they perform acts like sacrifice etc. With this
idea only, it has been said in the Adiparvan as - 'The austerity is not
dirt, nor the \[Vedic\] study, nor the natural ritual enjoined by the
Vedas, and nor the act of earning wealth by all efforts. But, if they
are struck by mind, they themselves become dirt.' (MB, Adi. i, 210).
\[Here in this passage\] dirt that which fetters. Natural : \[That is,
ordained \], such as - 'Without expecting anything, a Brahman should
learn the Vedas etc., together with their six subsidiaries' etc. By all
effort : by the act that is suitable and is well known in the scriptures
and in the worldly practice. By mind : by the mind that is yoked to the
traid of the Strands, Sattva etc. \[Those actions that\] have been
simply ruined \[by that mind\], are binding and not otherwise. This is
the idea here. Therefore, the acts like sacrifice etc., and the acts,
like aciring \[Wealth\] etc., for that purpose, have to be perfored as
being inevitable as long as the body exists. Or, perhaps, the word OM
conveys \[with regard to the Brahman\] the idea of That in Which the
entire universe has been totally calmed down. TAT conveys the idea of
That of the nature of Sovereign Independence of Will, which is nothing
but comprehending the rising waves in the form of the universe. And the
word SAT denotes the act of manifestation by the Brahman - even though
It is complete in Itself - as \[the universe\] having varied nature, a
manifestation that causes differences (or duality) expanding under the
weight of its Sovereign Independenc of Will. Hence it has been said 'In
the sense of manifesting as beings and in the sense of manifesting
perfectly \[SAT is employed\].' Thus, having is front \[as a casue\]
that aspect (the Soul) of highly tranil nature; and having in the centre
that aspect which is well connected with desire-waves viz., the desire
to make gift, the desire to perform sacrifice and the desire to observe
penance; this final body radiates (or dances) filled with a group of
activities, such as offering gift, performing sacrifice and observing
austerity, and of what are conducive to them. This triad is indeed
simultaneously the inherent nature of the Unhindered One (the Soul). So,
what fruit could be there ; And to whom ; How ; Whence ; Where ; And by
what means ; The act of person, with no faith, is an act of the Tamas
and bears no fruit in any way and bears fruit which is nothing but the
labour undertaken in bringing together the band of means \[of those
acts\]. Hence one should not on any account remain faithless. This is
being said now :
