+++
title = "+027"

+++

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

27 (853)  
Indra  
Vasukra Aindra  
24 verses: triṣṭubh  
This is one of the most obscure and also one of the most intriguing hymns in the  R̥gveda. In general and in its many particulars it has received a number of compet ing and conflicting treatments. We will restrict ourselves to presenting our own,  often tentative, interpretation, without discussion of other possibilities that have  been advanced.  
First of all, in our opinion the hymn falls into two complementary units, verses  1–12 and 13–24, with the former subdivided into verses 1–7, 8–10, and 11–12 and  the latter into verses 13–18 and 19–24. The overall theme of the whole hymn is the  proper reciprocal relationship between men and gods, especially Indra, as symbol  
ized by the sacrifice, and the proper functioning of the cosmos that this mutual rela tionship ensures. But this theme is treated in distinct ways in the course of the hymn. The first half is primarily in dialogue between Indra and the singer. In it  Indra contrasts the aid he gives to sacrificers with the destruction he metes out  to non-sacrificers (vss. 1, 4), and the singer echoes Indra’s contrastive pairing by  announcing his intention to offer to Indra, as opposed to the self-aggrandizing  atheists (vs. 2). Indra is somewhat skeptical of the singer’s intent (vs. 3): he suggests  that men sacrifice to him only when they need his help (3cd), but after he has helped  them win, they forget to offer to him (3ab). Indra continues boasting about his pow ers (vs. 5), perhaps taken up by the singer (or still in the mouth of Indra himself;  vs. 6), promising destruction to non-sacrificers. The singer’s glorification of Indra’s  powers and the devastation he will produce ends this section (vs. 7).  
The contrast between followers of Indra and their opposites is continued by  another image in the next verses, the metaphor of lost and straying livestock. In  verse 8 cows are wandering loose, grazing in the pasture of a stranger, though  accompanied by a cowherd. In our view the cows stand for men, turning away from devotion to “their own lord,” Indra, to follow other ways and other leaders. In  verse 9 Indra promises to reassemble his lost herd and reestablish proper relation ships among them. The first half of verse 10 has the sound of a truth formulation,  again announcing the reassembling of the herd, with the second half of the verse  expressing the consequences for his weakened enemies, using the striking image of  these enemies fighting Indra “with women,” a phrase used elsewhere of about-to be-defeated opponents (V.30.9; cf. I.104.3).  
The mention of women in verse 10 may have prompted the coda verses 11–12,  which treat the legal issue of the flawed woman given in marriage, known also from  the later dharma literature (cf. Mānava Dharma Śāstra IX.72–73, VIII.205, 224).  According to Manu a father is culpable if he tries to marry off a physically or  mentally flawed girl without declaring her faults in advance, but if he has informed  the bridegroom before the marriage, the latter has no legal recourse. Here verse  10 contrasts the suitor of a blind girl who knows she is blind (ab), with one who  was tricked into marriage without that knowledge and who therefore has the right  to deploy mení “the power of thwarted exchange.” (For further discussion, see  Jamison 1996b.) Verse 12 presents the opposite picture of an unflawed and happy  bride, embodying the appropriate and successful functioning of the exchange rela tions that characterize Ārya society.  
Thus, though this first half of X.27 utilizes three dominant images—sacrificers  versus non-sacrificers, a unified herd following its herdsman versus dispersed and  straying livestock, and a properly contracted marriage versus one that involves  fraud and deception—all three contrast proper social relationships with aberrant  ones, and warn of the consequences of the latter  
The second half of the hymn seems superficially to have nothing to do with  what went before, but viewed in the larger context it can be seen to pick up the first  and most important image, that of sacrifice as the binding relationship between  men and gods, and to develop it. The first six verses of this half (vss. 13–18) deal,  in our view, with the creation of the sacrifice and the mystery of its central focus,  the fire. This section begins with two riddling verses (13–14) identifying the fire  without naming it: verse 13 of the already kindled fire and verse 14 of its creation  by the “lofty steed” without shadow or foliage, probably the fire-churning spindle  (later pramantha), and the mother, probably the lower fire stick (aráṇī) with a hole  in which the spindle is turned and from which the “embryo,” the fire itself, emerges.  The second half of this verse describes the oblation, conceived of as a cow, “lick ing the calf (that is, the fire) of another (that is, the fire stick)” when poured into  the fire. The creation of the fire is also treated in verse 16, with much of the same  lexicon, but with the addition of the ten fingers, which manipulate the fire-making  apparatus.  
In between is an enigmatic verse (15) about unidentified but numerically pre cise groups coming from different directions. In our view this treats the original  establishment of the sacrifice through the cooperation of various prototypical Ārya  communities (perhaps including the Seven Seers, the Navagvas, and the Daśagvas).1414 X.27  
This theme is continued, though somewhat enigmatically, in verse 17, but in verse  18 there is schism: two groups go off in opposite directions and follow opposite cus toms, cooking versus non-cooking. It is the cooks and their fire who are predicted  to prevail. With this we return to the stark divisions of the first half of the hymn  between sacrificers and non-sacrificers. The split depicted in verse 18 also reminds  us of the fuller treatment of sacrificial schism in I.33.4–10.  
If the first eighteen verses of this hymn are fiendishly difficult, the last six  (19–24) might properly be termed impossible—not so much because of their  grammar, but because of the rare words, the obscurity of the references, and the  unclarity of the relationships of the verses to each other and to the rest of the  hymn. The interpretation that follows is even more tentative than what has pre  
ceded. The first two verses of this section (19–20) seem to be riddles turning on  astronomical or temporal references. The first may refer to the year and its com ponent parts (“the horde”) turning by itself and regularly bringing an end to the  mortal generations while renewing itself. The “two oxen of the Pulverizer” (death  or old age?) in verse 20 could perhaps be another temporal reference, to night and  day as similarly measuring out the lifespan of humans, beneath the eternal world  of heaven and the heavenly bodies. This theme appears to be continued in the  first half of the next verse (21), though what the “mace” (vájra) represents here is  entirely unclear—perhaps the year or other temporal division as a weapon that  smites mortals. The second half of this verse seems to offer a less bleak picture  than the inevitable decay and destruction that temporal divisions bring in their  train: there is “other fame,” to which old age can lead, though what that fame is  or is based on is not stated.  
If we are correct, the implicit answer to this question is the sacrifice and its cen ter, fire, and this answer is given obliquely in verse 22. Fire the substance is always  potentially present, but not always actually present, and so it appears to defy the  temporally defined progress to old age and death. Latent “within every tree,” it  can burst forth at any time. It is frightening in some of its effects (the flames as  “man-eating birds”) and strikes terror in all beings (pāda c), but is also the benevo lent focus of sacrifice (pāda d). The original establishment of the sacrifice by the  gods seems to be treated in verse 23, and in the thoroughly obscure last pāda of  that verse Indra, unnamed, may come himself to the sacrifice for epiphany, thus  returning us to the beginning of the hymn and the direct involvement of Indra with  sacrificers.  
The last verse is no clearer than the preceding ones, though it seems to be  announcing a final, instructive truth according to which one should lead one’s life.  Perhaps the idea is that the sacrifice is the means to life, which connects one to the  eternal world of heaven and the sun. The destructive temporal forces mentioned  earlier (vss. 20–21) were “below the sun,” but in this final verse the sun reveals itself,  hides the mist (if that’s what the phonologically problematic hapax busá means),  and reaches its “foot” (a sunbeam going toward the ground?) out to be seen, thus  providing a potential bond for the sacrificing mortal to the higher world. This shaft of light, liberated from its covering, that ends the hymn, seems an optimistic prom ise to the addressee of better things than decay and death.  
But much of this is poorly supported speculation, and the hymn, especially the  final verses of the hymn, invites further detailed investigation.
</details>
