+++
title = "+013"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘युजे वाम्' इति पञ्चर्चं त्रयोदशं सूक्तमदितेः पुत्रस्य विवस्वत आर्षम् । हविर्धानाख्ये ये द्वे शकटे तद्देवत्यमिदम् । अन्त्या जगती शिष्टास्त्रिष्टुभः । तथा चानुक्रान्तं--- युजे पञ्च विवस्वानादित्यो हाविर्धानं जगत्यन्तम्' इति । गतः सूक्तविनियोगः । हविर्धानप्रवर्तने ‘युजे वाम्' इत्येका। सूत्रितं च--- अन्तरा वर्त्म पादयोर्युजे वां ब्रह्म पूर्व्यं नमोभिः' (आश्व. श्रौ. ४. ९) इति ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

13 (839)  
The Soma Carts  
Havirdhāna Āṅgi or Vivasvant Āditya  
5 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 5  
According to the Anukramaṇī, this hymn is addressed to the two havirdhāna carts,  the carts on which the soma is brought to the place of sacrifice. Although the carts  are not explicitly mentioned in the hymn, this assignment is undoubtedly correct  and confirmed by the recitation of the first two verses in the later canonical rit  
ual when the carts are pushed into place. The first four verses are also found in  

Atharvaveda (Śaunaka) XVIII.38–41 (in slightly different order) in a large collec tion of funeral verses, while verse 5 is paralleled by Atharvaveda VII.57.2. The  hymn presents a number of difficulties, and the conceptual relationship among the  verses is not always clear. Nonetheless, for various reasons (to be sketched below) it  seems likely that the R̥gvedic hymn forms a unity.  
The first two verses are the clearest and have the clearest ritual content: the two  soma carts are hitched up, the signal for the sacrifice is given, and the carts are  brought to the sacrificial ground.  
After these two verses of relative clarity, we are plunged into the numerological  obscurity of verse 3—not surprisingly the middle verse with the typical form of an  omphalos verse. (Oldenberg refers to its “vague mysticism” [vage Mystik] and sug gests resignation as a proper response for the interpreter [1913: 135 = 1967: 822].)  It does not help that the first, scene-setting pāda contains the impossible word rúp,  which arouses the same bewilderment in its other occurrence, IV.5.7. Nonetheless,  we can sketch some parameters for the interpretation of the verse, though our inter pretation is quite insecure in detail. First, it seems to continue the ritual scenario  of the first two verses, and the 1st-person speaker, with his four 1st-person verbs,  matches the speaker of the first pāda of the hymn. In the first pāda of this verse we  suggest (following an offhand suggestion of Oldenberg’s [1913: 136 = 1967: 823])  that the “five steps” (páñca padā́ni) of the rúp (here translated “mount”) are the  five verses of this very hymn. The “four-footed” (cátuṣpadī) entity in the next verse  must be feminine in gender, and various suggestions have been made for what noun  to supply. We believe that its reference is deliberately ambiguous: it may refer to the  four pādas of a verse (ŕ̥c fem.), thus continuing the (possible) theme of 3a. It has  also been suggested that the noun is vartaní “course, track” (also feminine), and the  speaker is literally following the track of the two soma carts, each with two wheels,  thus four wheel-ruts altogether. The only other R̥gvedic occurrence of the adjective  “four-footed” is in I.164.41, where it modifies the noun gaurī́ “buffalo cow” refer  
ring to Speech, which is regularly said to consist of four parts. Thus in our view  this pāda refers both to ritual action (following the four wheel-ruts of the carts)  and ritual speech (the four-pāda verse), and ritual speech in particular calls to mind  Speech in general. In the next pāda (3c) the poet seems to make explicit the equiva  
lence of his particular ritual speech and Speech in general by claiming to make a  single syllable the equivalent of Speech herself. This mystical treatment of the ritual  ends with a purification (3d).  
Verse 4 veers off in a different direction and alludes obliquely to what we might  call the Felix Culpa (“fortunate fall”) of Yama, who, though born immortal (at least  according to I.83.5 and possibly X.17.1), chose death over immortality in order to  sacrifice to the gods (pāda a) and produce offspring (pādas b and d), whereas the  gods constituted their sacrifice through Br̥haspati and avoided death but also do not  reproduce. (So, roughly, Geldner.) This fleeting reference to Yama’s choice seems to  answer the question left hanging at the end of X.10—will Yama yield to Yamī’s  frenzied entreaties for sex or will he maintain his ascetic distance? On the basis of the offspring mentioned here, he seems to have yielded, though in the present verse  the role of Yamī has been elided and the agency rests with Yama—he “chose.” But why, one may well ask, is this bit of Yama’s history found in a hymn dedi cated to the soma carts? It is probably more productive to ask why a hymn to the  soma carts is found in this Yama cycle (X.10–19), positioned right before the funeral  hymns, especially X.14 dedicated to Yama. First, remember that the Atharvaveda  repetitions of the first four verses of this hymn are found in the collection of funeral  verses, so to the compilers of the Atharvaveda they must have seemed appropriate  to a funeral context. Note, moreover, that the carts themselves are called “twins”  (yamé) in verse 2, paired with verse 4 around the omphalos verse 3; “twins” of  course calls to mind the twin couple Yama and Yamī. The pairing of the two carts  also reminds us of the two divergent paths, one leading to the gods (devayā́na), one  to the ancestors or forefathers (pitr̥yā́na); the latter is the one that the dead follow  to the world where Yama presides. This journey is a particular preoccupation of  the funeral hymns, and the conflation of the twin (yamé) soma carts with the twin  paths, one of which leads to Yama, may explain how the soma carts ended up in  the Yama collection.  
The final verse brings the hymn full circle, but with a series of tricks embedded  in it. On the surface the last half of the verse returns to the ritual situation and the  soma carts, which take their places (yatete) with the same phraseology as verse 2  (yátamāne). They rule over and thrive on “it” of both kinds, most likely a reference  to both pure and mixed soma (cf., e.g., VIII.101.10). But the lack of explicit refer  
ents for any of the forms of “both,” combined with the first half of the verse, which  has nothing obvious to do with the carts, invites us to look further. The first half of  the verse seems to draw the same contrast as in verse 4 between gods and mortals.  While the referent in pāda a is fairly clearly Indra (the epithet “accompanied by the  Maruts” being a strong clue), we are inclined to see Yama as the referent in pāda b;  he who surrendered his immortality for the sake of offspring is identified as a father  in conjunction with sons, in fact the mortals whom he sired after he chose death.  We, the poets and sacrificers, are among these sons, and have learned our verbal  craft (“have made truth [our] familiar”) and produced this poem.  
If we are correct in our identification of Yama as the father in 5b, there are  several further implications for the structure and contents of this hymn. On the  one hand, the father and sons of 5b both recall and contrast with “all the sons  of the immortal one” in 1c, for those were the gods. So we have another element  of a formal ring structure, but with a different referent. The contrastive pairs  Indra/Yama and gods/mortals may also underlie the insistent “both/both kinds”  of the second half of verse 5, where (despite the neuter [or feminine] gender of the  repeated subject ubhé “both”) Indra and Yama may be credited with joint ruler ship (note that Yama is called “king” in the first verse of the next hymn, X.14.1d)  and prosperity.  
To sum up and indeed to go further, this hymn, and the hymn cycle within  which it is embedded, are a reflection of and a reflection on the dualities that define  

human existence: mortal and immortal, male and female, heaven and earth, sacred  and profane, as we pointed out in the introduction to the Yama cycle as a whole.  These dualities are neatly conceptually symbolized in the notion of twins, the pri mal twins Yama and Yamī, and in this hymn also ritually symbolized by the twin  soma carts, appropriate both to the sacrifice and to the divergent paths that lead  to the gods and the ancestors respectively, thus providing a proper preface to the  funeral hymns that follow.

<div class="js_include" url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/10/010-019.md"  newLevelForH1="5" includeTitle="false"> </div>  

</details>
