+++
title = "03 न रूपमस्येह"

+++
15.3 - 15.4 The form of this tree, having its origin above, i.e., in the
four-faced Brahma and branches below in the sense that man forms the
crest through continual lineage therefrom, and also having its branches
extended above and below by actions done in the human state and forming
secondary roots - that form of the tree is not understood by people
immersed in Samsara. Only this much is perceived: 'I am a man, the son
of Devadatta, the father of Yajnadatta; I have property appropriate to
these conditions'. Likewise, it is not understood that its destruction
can be brought about by detachment from enjoyments which are based on
Gunas. Similarly it is not perceived that attachment to the Gunas alone
is the beginning of this (tree). Again, it is not perceived that the
basis of this tree is founded on ignorance which is the misconception of
self as non-self. Ignorance alone is the basis of this tree, since in it
alone the tree is fixed. This Asvattha, described above, firm-rooted,
i.e., the roots of which are firm and manifold, is to be cut off by the
strong axe of detachment, namely, detachment from the sense objects
composed of the three Gunas. This can be forged through perfect
knowledge. As one gains detachment from sense-objects, one should seek
and find out the goal from which nobody ever returns. How does this
attachment to sense-objects, which consists of the Gunas and erroneous
knowledge forming its cause, cease to exist; Sri Krsna now answers: One
should seek 'refuge (Prapadyet) in the Primal Person' alone in order to
overcome this ignorance. One should seek refuge (Prapadyeta) in Him who
is primal, namely, the beginning of all entities, as stated in the
following text: 'With Me as the Lord, the Prakrti gives birth to all
that which moves, and that which does not move' (9.10), 'I am the origin
of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8), and 'There is nothing higher
than Me, O Arjuna' (7.7). From Me, the creator of everything, has
streamed forth this ancient activity, continuing from time immermorial,
of attachment to sense-objects consisting of Gunas. This has been
declared already by Me: 'For this divine Maya of Mine consisting of the
Gunas is hard to break through. But those who take refuge in me alone
shall pass beyond this Maya' (7.14). Or a variant of this stanza is
'prapadya iyatah pravrttih' (in place of 'prapadyet yatah pravrittih').
This gives the sense that this discipline of taking refuge in the
Supreme Person for dispelling of ignorance has continued from a distant
past. The tendencies of ancient persons seeking liberation are also
ancient. The purport is this: The ancient liberation-seekers, taking
refuge in Me alone, were released from bondage. \[This can be taken to
mean that Prapatti or taking refuge in the Lord had originated in the
Bhakti tradition of the Sri-Vaisnavites from ancient sages i.e., from
the Alvars who preceded Ramanuja by several centuries. It is not a
creation of Ramanuja\].
