+++
title = "15 सर्वस्य चाहम्"

+++
15.15 Controlling everything by My will, I exist as 'the self in their
hearts', namely, in the place from which springs knowledge, the root of
activity and inactivity of all beings as also of the Soma and digestive
fire. So the Srutis declare in the following texts: 'Entering within, He
is the ruler of all things and the Self of all' (Tai. A., 3.11), 'He
who, dwelling in the earth ৷৷. He who, dwelling in the self, is within
the self ৷৷. who controls the earth' (Br. U. Madh., 3.7. 3. 22); 'The
heart which is comparable to an inverted lotus-bud' (Ma. Na., 11.7); and
'Now, here, in the city of brahman, is an abode, a small lotus-flower'
(Cha. U., 8.1.1). The Smrtis also declare thus: 'Visnu is the ruler of
the whole universe, who permeates the universe' (V. P., 1.17. 20), 'He
is the ruler of all, who is minutely small among those who are minutely
small (Manu., 12.122); and 'He is the controller, the judge, the King,
who is seated in your heart' (Ibid., 8.92). Therefore, the memory of all
beings springs from Me alone. 'Memory' is knowledge springing from
experience and its subtle impressions. They have for their contents past
experiences. 'Knowledge' is determination of a thing through the senses,
inference, the scriptures and intuitive meditation. This is also from
Me. So does 'Apohana' too. 'Apohana' signifies the cessation of
knowledge. 'Apohana' may also mean 'Uhana' (conjectural knowledge).
Uhana is 'Uha' (conjecture). 'Uha' is that knowledge which is accessory
to the actual means of knowledge (Pramana). It is done by determining
whether that means of knowledge can be operative with reference to the
particular subject-matter on hand, through the examination of the
instruments of that means of knowledge (Pramana). This 'Uha' also comes
from Me. Indeed 'I am to be known from all the Vedas,' for I am the
inner ruler of Agni, Surya, Soma, Vayu, Sun and Indra and other
divinities as their self. The Vedas are intent on speaking of them
(i.e., the divinities). 'I am to be known from all the Vedas; for, terms
like gods, men etc., signify the individual selves in them. I bring
about the fruition of the Veda. 'Vedanta', here means the end, namely,
the fruition, of Vedic injunctions like 'Let sacrifice be made to Indra'
and 'Let sacrifice be made to Varuna.' For, all Vedas find their
consummation in fruition. 'Antakrt' means grantor of fruits. The meaning
is: 'I alone am the grantor of the fruition described in the Vedas.'
This has been already declared in the verses beginning from, 'Whichever
devotee seeks to worship with faith whatever form' and ending with,
'From that faith he gets the objects of his desire, granted in reality
by Me alone' (7.21 - 22); and also 'I am the enjoyer and the only Lord
of all sacrifices' (9.24). I am the knower of the Vedas; I know the Veda
that speaks about Me. The sense is that he who speaks of the meaning of
the Vedas as otherwise than this import, is not the knower of the Vedas.
Therefore, listen from Me alone the meaning or the essene of the Vedas.
