+++
title = "16 द्वाविमौ पुरुषौ"

+++
15.16 There are, the Sastras say, 'two kinds of Persons (Purusas)' well
known in the world - 'the perishable and the imperishable.' Of the two,
the Persons designated by the term 'perishable' (Ksara) are beings
conjoint with non-conscient matter of modifiable nature, from Brahma
down to a blade of grass,who can be signified also by the term Jivas
(individual selves). Here the term Purusa (Person) is used in singular
to indicate the common single condition of being conjoined with
non-conscient matter. That which is the 'imperishable' (Aksara) is
called 'unchanging' (Kutastha), this is the released self, devoid of
association with non-conscient matter, remaining in its own form. It is
called 'unchangeable' inasmuch as when free from non-conscient matter,
It has no specific connection with particular transformations of
non-conscient matter like the bodies of Brahma etc. Here also the
designation of the term in singular (as expressing a generic class)
denoting the totality of liberated selves, is used on account of the
single condition of dissociation from non-conscient matter. It does not
mean that before this, in time without beginning, there existed but a
single liberated self. So it is stated: 'Purified by the austerity of
knowledge, many have attained My state' (4.10); and 'They are not born
at the time of creation, nor do they suffer at the time of dissolution'
(14.2).
