+++
title = "17 उत्तमः पुरुषस्त्वन्यः"

+++
15.17 But there is the 'Supreme Person who is other than the bound and
liberated selves' expressed by the terms, the 'perishable' and the
'imperishable'. He forms a completely different category. All Srutis
call Him the Supreme Self. But by that very designation as the Supreme
Self, it may be known that the Supreme Person is a category distinct
from the bound and the liberated selves. How; 'Entering the threefold
world,' supports it. 'Loka' (world) is that which is perceived. There
are three such perceivable worlds, He enters the 'three worlds' which
can be understood from the authority of the Srutis. These are the world
of unconscient matter, the world of conscient selves conjoined with
matter, and the world of liberated selves. As understandable from the
Srutis, He enters into these three categories as their Atman and
supports them. Thus, He is an entity different from the triad which He
pervades and maintains. Further He is different, as He is imperishable
and as He is the Lord. Being imperishable, He is different from the
bound non-conscient matter whose nature is subject to decay. He is
different from the bound conscient selves as the latter is subject to
Prakrti and follows its laws. He is also distinguished from the
liberated selves, because in their previous condition they were
connected with matter and mixed with it. Similarly, He is the Lord of
these 'three worlds,' a category distinct from those which have to be
ruled.
