+++
title = "02 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
13.2 The body which is cognised in identity with the experiencing self
by co-ordinate predication (Samanadhikaranya) in the propositions, 'I am
a god, 'I am a man,' 'I am fat,' 'I am slender' etc., is described by
those who know the real nature of the body as only the Field (Ksetra) of
experience for the experiencing self, who is distinct from the body.
Those who know this, namely, those who know the exact nature of the
self, call It the Field-knower (Ksetrajna). That knower who knows the
body, as divided into its different members and as their collectivity,
can say 'I know it, the body, as an object.' The person with this
perception is the one who is called the Ksetrajna or the Field-knower,
who must necessarily be different from the Field (Ksetra), which is the
object of this knowledge. It is true that at the time of perceiving an
object like a pot which is different from one's body, the seer who
thinks 'I am a god who sees it' or 'I am a man who sees it' etc., is
putting himself as identical with the body through co-ordinate
predication. In the same way he experiences the body as an object of
knowledge when he says 'I know this body.' Thus if the body is an object
of knowledge, it must be different from the knowing self. Therefore, the
Field-knower (Ksetrajna). The knower, is other than the body which is an
object of knowledge like a jar, etc. But this knowledge which arises by
way of co-ordinate predication is justified on the ground that the body
is inseparable from oneself; for it constitutes an attribute of the self
like 'cow-ness' of the cow etc. The knowing self is however unie in
being an eternal and subtle form of knowledge. But this is inaccessible
to the ordinary man's organs of vision; it is accessible only to a mind
refined by Yoga. The ignorant see the knower only in the form of Prakrti
because of close proximity to or union with Prakrti. Sri Krsna thus
declares later on: 'When in identiciation with the Gunas he departs or
stays or experiences, the deluded perceive him not. They, who have the
eye of knowledge, see' (15.10).
