+++
title = "03 क्षेत्रज्ञञ् चापि"

+++
13.3 Know as Myself the Field-knower also who is the only form of the
Knower in all the bodies like divinities, men etc., i.e., know them as
ensouled by Me. By the expression 'also' (Api) in, 'Know Me also (Api)
as the Field-Knower,' it is inferable that 'Know Me as the Field-Knower
in all Fields' has also been taught by implication. Just as the body, on
account of its being the attribute of the knower, cannot exist
separately, and is conseently denoted by way of co-ordinate predication
(Samanadhikarnya) with it, in the same manner both the Field and the
Field-Knower, on account of their being My attributes, cannot exist as
entities separate from Me, and hence can be denoted as 'one with Me' by
way of co-ordinate predication. Both the Ksetra (Field) which is an
aggregate of earth etc., and the Ksetrajna (the Jiva) have the Lord for
their Self, because of their being of the nature of the body of the
Lord. Such is the teaching of the Sruti passages beginning from 'He who
dwelling in the earth, is within the earth, whom the earth does not
know, whose body is the earth, who controls the earth from within - He
is your inner Controller and immortal Self' (Br. U., 3.7.3), and ending
with 'He who, dwelling in the individual self as the self within, whom
the self does not know, whose body the self is, who controls the self
from within - He is your inner Controller and immortal Self' (Br. U.
Madh., 3.7.22). It is the dwelling in of the Lord as the Self of all the
knowers of the bodies (Field-Knowers or the Jivas) on account of His
being the inner Controller, that is the justification for describing Him
as in co-ordinate predication (Samanadhikaranya) with them. In the
beginning and later on, it was taught to the effect, 'I am the self, O
Arjuna, dwelling in the hearts of all beings' (10.20), and 'Nothing that
moves or does not move exists without Me' (10.39) and 'I, with a single
aspect of Myself, am sustaining the whole universe' (10.42). In the
middle He describes Himself by way of co-ordinate predication as, 'Of
Adityas, I am Visnu' etc. In the teachings concerning the difference
between the body and its knower and concerning both of them as having Me
for their Self - this knowledge of unity by co-ordinate predication
alone is taught as 'My view.' Some (the followers of Advaita and
Bhedabheda) say: The sentence 'And know Me as the Knower' should be
understood as co-ordinate predication expressing identity between the
individual self and the Supreme Self. Thus according to their view, the
Lord (Isvara), who is Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute must be
admitted to have become the individual self, as it were, through
nescience (Ajnana). According to their docrine the teaching of identity
given here in the Text seeks to sublate that nescience. Just as teaching
by a reliable person to the effect, 'This is a rope, and not a snake,'
sublates the erroneous notion of a snake, the teaching of the Lord, who
is most reliable, sublates the erroneous notion of the individual self
(Ksetrjna) being different from Him. Such interpreters are to be
estioned thus: Is this Teacher, Bhagavan Vasudeva, the Supreme Ruler,
one whose nescience has been sublated by the exact knowledge of the Self
or not; If His nescience has been sublated, then the perception of
duality like Arjuna as the taught, and of actions like teaching, becomes
impossible, because of the impossibility of superimposing a flase form
on the Self which is in reality mere undifferentiated Consciousness. If,
however, His nescience has not been sublated on account of His not
having realised the Self, then, because of His ignorance, it is utterly
impossible for Him to teach the knowledge of the Self. Elsewhere it has
been stated: 'The wise, who have realised the truth, will instruct you
in knowledge' (4.34). Thus, the polemics of this nature are to be
ignored as having been set forth to misguide the world by these ignorant
daters whose arguments are contradicted by all Vedas, Smrtis, Itihasas,
the Puranas, logic and their own words. The truth is this: Some of the
Sruti texts declare that non-conscient matter, the conscient entity (the
individual self) and the Supreme Brahman are different in nature from
one another in the relation of object of enjoyment, the enjoyer
(subject) and the Supreme Ruler as follows: 'From Prakrti, the Possessor
of Maya projects this world, in which another (i.e. the individual self)
is confined by Maya (Sve. U., 4.9); 'Know then Maya to be the Prakrti
and the Possessor of Maya to be the Great Lord' (Sve. U., 4.10); 'The
perishable is Prakrti; the immortal and imperishable is Hara (the
individual self); and the Lord alone rules over both the perishable
Prakrti and the imperishable individual self' (Sve. U., 1.10). Here, the
expression, 'The immortal and the imperishable is Hara,' points out the
enjoyer (i.e., individual self); It is called Hara because the
individual self siezes matter as an object of It own experience. Again,
'He is the cause, the Lord of the lord of senses' (Ibid., 6.9); 'He has
no progenitor and no Lord' (Ibid., 6.9); 'He is the ruler of Prakrti, of
the individual self, and the Lord of alities' (Ibid., 6.16); 'He is the
Lord of the Universe, the Ruler of individual selves, the eternal, the
auspicious and the unchanging' (Ma. Na., 13.3); 'The two unborn - the
knowing Lord and the unknowing individual self, the omnipotent and the
impotent' (Sve. U.,1.9); 'The Constant among inconstants, the
Intelligent among the intelligents, the one who grants the desires of
the many' (Ibid., 6.13. & Ka. U., 5.13); 'When one knows the enjoyer,
the object of enjoyment and Actuater ৷৷.' (Sve. U., 1.12); 'Regarding
the individual self and the Actuater to be different, and blessed by
Him, It attains immortality' (Ibid., 1.6), and 'Ot these two, the one
eats the sweet Pippala fruit, the other shines in his splendour without
eating' (Ibid., 4.6 and Mun. U., 3.1.1). Further, 'There is one unborn
female, red, white and black, who produces many creatures like herself;
there is another unborn being who loves her and is close to her; there
is yet another male unborn who after having enjoyed here, gives her up'
(Ibid., 4.5); 'The cow (i.e. Prakrti) that has no beginning or end, is
the mother and source of all beings' (Cha. U., 4.5) and 'On the
self-same tree, the individual self sits sunken in grief, and being
ignorant and impotent, It grieves. When It sees the other, the gracious
Lord and His glory, It attains freedom from grief (Sve. U., 4.7). The
following passages of the Gita are alos to the point: 'This Prakrti,
thus divided eightfold, composed of Ahankara etc., is Mine.' 'This is My
lower Prakrti. Know My higher Prakrti to be distinct from this - the
Life Principle, by which the universe is sustained (7.4-5); 'All beings,
O Arjuna, enter into My Nature at the end of a cycle. These I send forth
again at the beginning of a cycle. Resorting to Prakrti, which is My
own, I send forth again and again all this multitude of beings, helpless
under the sway of Prakrti' (9.7-8); 'Under my control, Prakrti gives
birth to all that moves, and that which does not move. And because of
this, O Arjuna, does the world spin' (9.10); 'Know that Prakrti and the
individual self are without beginning' (13.19) 'The great Brahman (or
Prakrti) is My womb; in that I lay the germ; from it, O Arjuna, is the
birth of all beings' (14.3). The great Brahman of Mine, which is the
womb of this world, called Prakti, non-conscient matter, consisting of
elements in a subtle state - in it I lay the germ called conscient
entity. From that, namely, from the compound between conscient and
unconscient entities, which is willed by Me, are born all these beings
beginning with the gods and ending with the immobile things mixed up
with the unconscient matter. Such is the meaning. In the Sruti also, the
subtle original state of material elements is signified as Brahman:
'From Him are produced Brahman as also the world of matter and soul
(Anna) having name and form' (Mun. U., 1.1.9). Likewise, Sruti Texts
declare that the Supreme Person constitutes the Self of all, and the
conscient and non-conscient entities are inseparable from Him; for,
those conscient and unconscient entities, which abide in the form of the
experiencer and the experienced abiding in all states, form the body of
the Supreme Person; conseently they are under His control. These Texts
are as follows: 'He who, dwelling in the earth, is within the earth,
whom the earth does not know, whose body the earth is, who is the Inner
Ruler of the earth' and ending with, 'He who, dwelling in the self, is
within the self, whom the self does not know, whose body the self is and
who is the Inner Controller of the self' (Br. U. Madh., 3.7.3-22).
Likewise another passage declares: 'He who is moving withing the earth,
to whom the earth is the body, whom the earth does not know ৷৷. he who
is moving within the Mrtyu (Nature), to whom Mrtyu is the body, whom
Mrtyu does not know ৷৷. He is the Inner Self of all beings, sinless; He
is the divine Lord, He is of the one Narayana' (Sub. U., 7). Here the
term Mrtyu denotes the subtle state of non-conscient entity which is
expressed by the term Tamas, because in the same Upanisad, it is
declared, 'The unmanifest (Avyakta) merges into Aksara (the
imperishable), and the Aksara merges into Tamas (Ibid., 2). Elsewhere it
is stated thus: 'Entering within, is the Ruler of all creatures, the
self of all (Tai. A., 3.21). Therefore, the Supreme Person, who posseses
conscient and non-conscient entities abiding in all states as His body,
is in the form of the world, whether in the state of cause or of effect.
So, with the purpose of making this explicit, some Srutis declare that
the world in its states as cause and effect, is He Himself. They begin
with, 'This Existence (Sat) alone was in the beginning, one only without
a second ৷৷. It thought, "May I become many, may I multiply". It creates
Tejas' (Cha. U., 6.2.1.2), and ends with 'All creatures here, my dear,
have their root in the Sat (Being), have their home in the Sat, have Sat
as their support. All this has Sat for its self. That is Existence. He
is the Self. That you are, O Svetaketu' (Cha. U., 6.8.4.6-7). Elsewhere
is the following text beginning with, 'He desired, "May I become many";
He performed austerity; having performed austerity, He created all
this,' and concluding with, 'He became both the Satya (individual self)
and Anrta (matter), He has remained true to His nature' (Tai. U.,
2.6.1). The difference in nature between conscient and unconscient
entities and the Supreme Person, established in the other Sruti
passages, is asserted here also: 'Lo! Entering into these three
divinities (i.e. the Tejas, water and earth) in the form of living self
(individual self), which is Myself, I distinguish name and form; (Cha.
U., 6.3.2) and also in the text, 'Having created it, He entered into it.
Having entered it, He became Sat and Tyat ৷৷. He became both conscious
and unconscious, both the Satya (individual self) and Anrta (matter). He
has remained true to His own nature' (Tai. U., 2.6.1). It is in this way
that all the distinctions of names and forms are brought about: The
Sruti also declares, 'Then, this was undifferentiated. Now, it has been
differentiated by names and forms' (Br. U., 1.4.7). Therefore, He who
exists in the states of effect and cause, and who has the conscient and
unconscient entities in their gross and subtle states as His body, is
the Supreme Person. Because the effect is not other than the cause, the
effect becomes known when the cause is known, when the One becomes
known, everything is known - thus what is posited by the Srutis stands
explained. In the text, 'Entering into these three divinities by way of
living self (individual self) which is My self, I distinguish name and
form' (Cha. U., 6.3.2) - all the non-conscient entities are pointed out
by the expression, 'the three divinities', and then the distinguishing
of names and forms arises on account of the individual selves having Him
for Their Self, entering into those entities. Thus all expressive terms
signify the Supreme Self who is alified by the individual selves and
non-conscient matter. Therefore, co-ordinate predication
(Samanadhikaranya) of a term denoting an effect with a term denoting the
Supreme Self as cause, is ite appropriate. Thus the Supreme Brahman, who
has conscient and non-conscient entities in their gross and subtle
conditions as His modes, is Himself the effect and the cause; so Brahman
is the material cause of the world. Brahman Himself constitutes the
material cause of the world, because Brahman, who has the conscient and
unconscient entities in their subtle state as His body, forms the cause
of all. Still as that material cause is a composite entity (i.e., of
individual selves, Prakrti aand Isvara), there is no mixing up of the
natures of Brahman, conscient entities and non-conscient entities. This
is perfectly tenable. Thus, for example, although the material cause of
a multi-coloured cloth is a combination of white, black and red threads,
the connection of whiteness etc., with the cloth is to be found only in
the place where a particular kind of thread is woven in it; in the state
of effect also, there is no mixing up of the colours everywhere.
Similarly, although the world has for its material cause a combination
of the Lord, conscient and non-conscient entities, still in its
condition as an effect also, there is no mixing up of the respective
alities of experiencer (subject), the experienced (object) and the
Controller (God). Though these threads can exist separately they are
brought together at a time by man's will and acire the character and
effect as a conseence. But in the case of the world manifestation, there
is a unieness. It consists in that the intelligent and insentient
entities in both causal and effect conditions derive their existential
nature only from, and as, modes of the Supreme Person, by forming His
body. Thus the Supreme Person having those entities as His body, is
always signified by all these terms indicating them. As for the
differences in nature, their respective speciality of character holds
good here (i.e., in the production of world as of the coloured cloth).
Such being the case, though the Supreme Brahman enters the effect, owing
to absence of transformation of His nature, the unchangeability is well
established. To signify Brahman as effect is also very appropriate,
because He is the Self sustaining the conscient and non-conscient
entities from within their gross condition when they are differentiated
by name and form: What is called effect is nothing other than the cause
passing into another state of existence. The various scriptural
statements that the Supreme Brahman is without attributes are also
tenable in the sense that He is not associated with evil attributes, as
the Sruti text, 'He is free from evil, ageless, deathless, sorrowless,
hungerless, thirstless' eliminates all evil attributes, and then says
that He is full of auspicious attributes: 'Whose desire is real, whose
will is real' (Cha. U., 8.7.1). This Sruti text itself settles here what
was generally declared elsewhere that negation of attributes
(Guna-nisedha) pertains to evil attributes in Brahman. The doctrine that
Brahman is of the nature of knowledge is also ite appropriate, because
it amounts to saying that the true nature of Brahman, who is omniscient
and omnipotent, who is antagonistic to all that is evil, and who is the
mine of all auspicious attributes, can be adeately defined only as
Knowledge, as one whose nature is Knowledge, since He possesses
self-luminosity. The following texts teach that Brahman is the Knower:
'He who is all-knowing, all wise' (Mun. U., 1.1.9); 'His high power is
revealed, indeed, as various and natural, as consisting of knowledge,
strength and activity' (Sve.U., 6.8); 'My dear, by what means has one to
understand the Knower;' (Br. U., 2.4.14); and the text, 'Brahman is
Existence, Knowledge and Infinity' (Tai. U., 2.1.1). All these teach
that Brahman is of the nature of Knowledge in as much as He can be
defined only as Knowledge, and because also He is self-luminous. In the
texts 'He desired, "May I become many" ' (Tai. U., 2.6.1), 'It thought,
"May I become many" ' (Cha. U., 6.2.3), 'It became differentiated by
names and forms' - it is affirmed that Brahman thus exists of His own
Will in a wonderful plurality of modes on account of His having the
immovable and movable entities as His body. Conseently it is false to
affirm the opposite view that the manifold entities do not have Brahman
as their self in a real sense. Thus, it is the unreality of manifold
existence (i.e., of entities without Brahman for the Self) that is
denied in the following texts: 'He obtains death after death who sees
difference here' (Ka. U., 2.4.10), 'There is nothing here that is
manifold' (Ka. U., 2.4.11), 'But where there is duality, as it were,
there one sees another ৷৷. but where everything has become the self ৷৷.
there, by what can one see what ৷৷. who shall know which by what;' (Br.
U., 4.5.15). There is also no denial of the manifoldness of modes of the
Brahman resulting from His assumption of various names and forms by His
will. This is established in Sruti texts such as, 'May I become
manifold' (Tai. U., 2.6.1 and Cha. U., 6.2.3) etc. This manifold
modality is proved to be existent in the commencement of even that
passage which negates multiplicity by asserting. 'But where everything
has become the self' (Br. U., 4.5.15). 'Everything deserts Him who knows
everything to be apart from Him' (Br. U., 4.5.7), and 'Lo, verily, from
this great Being has been breathed forth that which is Rg veda' (Ibid.,
2.4.10). Thus there is no contradiction whatsoever among the Srutis
which assert difference in essence and in nature between the conscient
self, non-conscient matter and the Lord, whose body the former entities
are. There is no contradiction also in the scriptural statement that
they are identical. The relation of the body and the self exists at all
times between the Lord and the conscient and non-conscient entities. The
Sruti texts themselves establish that those entities, which constitute
the body (of the Lord), acire in causal condition, a subtle state, in
which they cannot be differentiated. In the effect condition they are in
a gross state with names and forms, and are capable of differentiation
into a multiplicity of entities as modes of the Supreme. Thus there is
no room whatsoever for entertaining such doctrines which ascribe
nescience to Brahman (as in Advaita), for describing the differences in
Brahman as due to limiting adjuncts (as in Bhedabheda) and other tenets
(Yadavaprakasa's). All these proceed from unsound logic and are in
viloation of all Srutis. Let this over-long polemic be terminated here.
The object of this long polemical passage is to refute the Advaitic
interpretation of the statement Know the Field-Knower in all bodies as
Myself' as one of absolute identity between the Jiva and Isvara. The
thesis of the author of the commentary is that the relation is not oneof
absolute identity but only one of identity of reference of several
inseparable entities to a comon substratum known technically as
Samandadhikaranya or co-ordinate predication, also translated sometimes
as grammatical co-ordination. The literal meaning of the expression is
'the relation of abiding in a common substratum.' The relation of the
Jiva and Prakrti to Isvara is as of body and soul or as a mode (Prakara)
and its substratum (Prakari). The relation between the body and soul of
an ordinary being is, however, separable at death. But it is inseparable
in the case of Isvara and this Jiva-cum-Prakrti body. In this sense
Isvara is the Field-knower (Ksetrajna) of the Field (Ksetra) constituted
of all individual entities conscient and inconscient, just as in each
individual personality the Jiva and the body are the field-knower and
the field respectively. \[Being in co-ordinate predication
(Samanadhikaranya), Brahman is an inseparable but mutually distinct
complex of Prakrti, Jiva and Isvara. The cosmic mode of body constituted
of Prakrti and Purusa is at intervals in alternate states of latency and
patency (Pralaya and Srsti or dissolution and manifestation). As the
soul of a complex whole, He can be denoed by any of the terms entering
into it - Isvara, Prakrti or Jiva. Brahan is sometimes mentioned in the
Srutis as Asat when everything is in latency in Pralaya, and as Sat when
all entities are in manifestations (Srsti). All these expressions denote
Him only. He is described in some texts as attributeless. It means only
that He is without any undesriable evil alities. He is on the other hand
endowed with countless auspicious attributes. All these contentions are
supported by numerous Vedic passages, which are oted in the
commentary.\]
