+++
title = "05 ऋषिभिर्बहुधा गीतम्"

+++
13.5 It is this truth regarding the Kestra and Ksetrajna that has been
sung in various ways by Parasara and others seers. For example, 'I and
you and others are composed of the elements; and the elements, following
the stream of alities, assume a shape; these alities, Sattva and the
rest, are dependent on Karma; and Karma, accumulated by nescience,
influences the condition of all beings. The self is pure, imperishable,
tranil, void of alities and is pre-eminent over Prakrti' (V. P.,
2.13.69-71). Similarly: 'The body, characterised by head, hands, feet
and the like is different from Purusa.' Which of these can I designate
by the name I;' (Ibid., 2.13.89). And also: 'Are you the head or the
belly; Are you indeed the feet and other limbs, or do they belong to
you, O King; You are distinct in your nature from all your members, O
King. Know, O King, and understand "Who am I" '. (Ibid., 1.13.102-3).
Moreover they state that Vasudeva constitutes the Self of the distinct
entities (Ksetra and Ksetrajna): 'The senses, Manas, Buddhi, vigour,
splendour, strength, courage, both Ksetra and Ksetrajna have Vasudeva
for their self. (Ma. Bha. Sa., 149.136). In various distinctive hymns,
namely, in the Vedas, Rg, Yajus, Saman and Atharvan, the distinction of
body and the self has been sung. The nature of the body is described in
the following text: 'From this Self, verily, ether arose; from the
ether, air; from air, fire; from fire, water; from water, the earth;
from the earth, herbs; from the herbs, food; from food, the person. The
same person, verily, consists of the essence of food' (Tai. U., 2.1.2).
Afterwards that which is inner than this (body) and which consists of
Prana (or the vital breath), and that which is inner than this and which
consists of mind are described. The nature of Ksetrjna is stated in the
passage: 'Verily, other than, and within, that one that consists of
mind, that (the individual Self) consists of understanding' (Ibid.,
2.4.2). Later, the Supreme Brahman is stated in the text; 'Verily, other
than, and within, that one consisting of understanding, is the Supreme
Self that consists of bliss' (Ibid., 1.5.2). This is stated to be the
Surpeme Self, consisting of bliss, as forming the inner Self of the
individual self. Similarly in the three Vedas, Rg, Saman and Atharvan,
here and there, the distinctive existence of the Ksetra and the
Ksetrajna is affirmed with Brahman for their Self. Likewise, the same
purpose is taught in the words of the Brahma-sutras, namely, the
aphorisms about Brahman, known also as the Sariraka-sutras, which are
characterised by reasoning, decision and conclusion. In the Sutras
commencing with, 'Not ether, on account of the absence of the Sruti' (B.
S., 2.3.1), the nature and the mode of the Ksetra is determined. In the
Sutras commencing with 'Not the self, on account of the Sruti and on
account of the eternity, (which is made out) from them' (Ibid., 2.3.18),
the true nature of the Ksetrajna is determined. In the Sutras 'But from
the Supreme, this being declared by Sruti' (Ibid., 2.3.40), that
Ksetrajna has the Lord for Its Self on account of Its being under the
control of the Lord, is declared. It has been sung in various ways; the
meaning of this Sloka is this: Listen about the truths of the Ksetra and
the Ksetrajna which have been expounded in numerous ways and declared by
Me in a lucid and brief manner.
