+++
title = "06 महाभूतान्यहङ्कारो"

+++
13.6 - 13.7 The 'great elements, the Ahankara, the Buddhi and the
Avyakta' are substances that originate the Ksetra. The 'great elements'
are the earth, water, fire, air and ether. The 'Ahankara' here means
Bhutadi (primeval element). The 'Buddhi' is called Mahat; the 'Avyakta'
is known as the Prakrti. The 'ten senses and the one' and the five
objects of senses are principles depending on the Ksetra. The 'five
sensorial organs' are ear, skin, eye, tongue and nose. The five motor
organs are speech, hands, feet, and the organs of excretion and
reproduction. These are the ten senses. The Manas is the additional
'one' moe. The 'objects of the senses' are five - sound, touch, form,
taste and smell. Desire, hatred, pleasure and pain, being the
transformation of the Ksetra, are said to be the modifications of the
Ksetra. Though desire, hatred, pleasure and pain are the alities of the
self, yet they originate from the association of the self with the
Ksetra. Sri Krsna will state that they are the attributes of the self;
'In the experience of pleasure and pain, the self is said to be the
cause' (13.20). The combination of elements serves as the support
(Adhrti) of the intelligent self. As such, the word Adhrti means
substratum. The combination of material elements has arisen as the
substratum for the self to experience pleasure and pain, and for aciring
worldly experiences and the final release. The combination of elements
is formed by substances commencing from the Prakrti and ending with the
earth; it is the basis of senses which are endowed with the
modifications of the nature of desire, hatred, pleasure and pain. These
form a Sanghata or an association of elements. It serves as the basis of
the experience of pleasure and pain by the individual self. This is what
is said of the Ksetra. This Ksetra has been explained briefly with its
modifications and effects. Now certain alities, the effects of the
Ksetra, worthy of being acired as being the means for securing the
knowledge of the self, are enumerated.
