+++
title = "13 ज्ञेयं"

+++
13.13 I shall declare that nature of the individual self (brahman) which
is the object to be known, namely, what is to be gained by means of
virtues like modesty etc., by knowing which one attains to the self
which is immortal, birthless, free from old age, death and such other
material alities. \[The expression is split up as - Anadi =
beginningless; Mat-param = having Me as the Highest.\] Anadi means that
which is beginningless. Indeed, there is no origination for this
individual self (brahman) and for the same reason, It is endless. The
Sruti also declares: 'The wise one is not born, nor dies' (Ka. U.,
2.18). 'Matpara' means having Me for the Highest. Verily, it has been
told: 'Know that which is other than this (lower nature), which is the
life-principle, to be the highest Prakrti of Mine' (7.5). By virtue of
being the body of the Lord, the nature of the self finds joy in being
completely subsidiary to Him. So the Sruti declares: 'He who, dwelling
in the self, is within the self, whom the self does not know, whose body
the self is and who controls the self from within ৷৷.' (Br. U. Madh.,
5.7.22). Similarly do the texts declare: 'He is the cause, Lord of Lords
and of sense organs. He has no progenitor, nor lord' (Sve. U., 6.9); and
'He is the Lord of the Pradhana and of the individual selves, and the
Lord of alities (Ibid., 6.16). That which is conjoined with the ality of
infinite dimension or extensiveness can be designated as brahman. It is
different from, and not circumscribable by, the body etc. The meaning
is, It is the principle which apprehends the Ksetra. Sruti also
declares: 'He (i.e., the individual self) partakes of infinity' (Sve.
U., 5.9). By its Karma It is circumscribed. It assumes Its infinite
nature only when It is freed from the bonds of Karma. The term brahman
is applied to designate the individual self as in: 'He, crossing beyond
the Gunas', becomes fit for the sake of brahman' (14.26), 'I am the
ground of the brahman, who is immutable and immortal' (14.27), and
'Having attained to the state of brahman, tranil, he neither grieves nor
craves; regarding all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me'
(18.54). It (brahman) is said to be neither being nor non-being. The
terms 'being' and 'non-being' cannot signify the nature of the self
because It is neither effect nor cause. For It is called 'being' (Sat)
in the condition of effect when It has the form of gods etc. As It
cannot possess names and forms in the condition of cause, It is said to
be 'non-being' or Asat. So the Sruti texts declare: 'In the beginning,
verily, this (brahman) was non-existence; therefrom the being was born'
(Tai. U., 2.7.1) and 'Verily, this (brahman) was then undifferntiated.
It became differentiated by names and forms' (Br. U., 1.4.7). The self's
conditions as effect and cause have arisen on account of veiling by
Avidya or ignorant in the form of Karma. It is not an expression of Its
real nature. So, the terms 'being' and 'non-being' do not signify the
nature of the self, If it is argued that, in the passage 'In the
beginning, verily, this (Brahman) was non-existence' (Tai. U., 2.7.1),
it is the Supreme Brahman in the state of cause that is described - even
then it can be pointed out that the Supreme Brahman in causal condition
has, for His body, the conscient and non-conscient entities in a subtle
state, incapable of being differentiated by names and forms. Such a
description is therefore valid. On the same principle the nature of
Ksetra (body) and Ksetrajna (individual self) in the state of cause can
also be indicated by the term 'non-being'. But this condition of the
individual self has arisen due to Karma and such descriptions as 'being'
and 'non-being' are applicable to the self only in the state of bondage.
Its pure form cannot be signified by the terms 'being' and 'non-being'.
