+++
title = "21 कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे हेतुः"

+++
13.21 The 'Karya' means the body, the 'Karanas' mean the instruments,
i.e., the senses of perception and action plus the Manas. In their
operations, the Prakrti, subservient to the self, is alone the causal
factor. The sense is that their operations, which are the means of
experience, have their foundation in the Prakrti, which has developed in
the form of the body subservient to the self. In regard to this, the
authority is the aphorism, 'The self is an agent, on account of the
scriptures having the purpose' (B. S., 2.3.33) etc. The agency of the
self means that the self is the cause of the will (effort) to support
the body. The self (Purusa) associated with the body is the cause for
experiencing pleasures and pains. The meaning is that It is the seat of
those experiences. Thus, has been explained the difference in the
operations of the Prakrti and of the self when they are mutually
conjoined. He now proceeds to explain how, though the self, which in Its
pristine nature experiences Itself by Itself as nothing but joy, becomes
the cause of experiencing both pleasure and pain derived from sense
objects when It is conjoined with a body. The term Guna figuratively
represents effects. The self (in Its pristine nature) experiences Itself
by Itself, as nothing buy joy. But when dwelling in the body, i.e., when
It is in conjunction with the Prakrti, It experiences the alities born
of Prakrti, namely, happiness, pain etc., which are the effects of Gunas
like Sattva etc. He explains the cause of conjunction with the Prakrti:
