+++
title = "23 उपद्रष्टाऽनुमन्ता च"

+++
13.23 The self existing in the body becomes the 'spectator and approver'
of this body by means of the will in consonance with the functioning of
the body. Likewise, It is the 'supporter' of the body, Similarly, It
becomes 'experiencer' of the pleasure and pain resulting from the
activities of the body. Thus, by virtue of ruling and supporting the
body and by making the body completely subservient, It becomes 'the
great lord' (Mahesvara) in relation to the body, the senses and the
mind. Sri Krsna will further declare: 'When the lord acires the body,
and when he leaves it and goes on his way, he takes these as the wind
carries scents from their places' (15.8). In the body, It is said to be
the 'supreme self' in relation to the body, the senses and the mind. The
word 'self' (Atman) is applied to the body and the mind subseently. It
is said afterwards: 'Some perceive the self by means of the self through
meditation' (13.24). The particle 'also' (api) indicates that the self
is the 'supreme lord'; in relation to the body just as It is the supreme
self. The supremacy of the self has been described in the text beginning
with 'It is the beginningless brahman having Me for the Highest'
(13.12). It is true that the self (in Its emancipated state) has
limitless power knowledge. But It becomes the great lord and the supreme
self only in relation to the body. Such lordship and supremacy is the
result of attachment to the Gunas arising from the beginningless
conjunction with Prakrti.
