+++
title = "03 यो मामजमनादिम्"

+++
10.3 He who exists 'without being born' at any particular time unlike
other beings is 'unborn' in the sense of being eternal. For, this
attribute denotes a unie state distinct in kind both from insentient
things which are subject to modifications, and from the self in Its
state of involvement in Samsara when It is united with insentient
matter. In that state the birth of the self involved in matter is
generated by Karma. The temr 'Anadi', or without beginning, is used to
distinguish the state of the Lord, which is distinct in kind, from that
of the liberated state which is birthless but can be said to have a
beginning. For, to the liberated self, the state of liberation has a
beginning, because, in regard to this, conjunction with matter which
deserves to be abandoned, existed previously. Hence the term 'Anadi'
implies that the Lord is without such conjunction and does not deserve
the same description. The Sruti also says: 'Him who is stainless' (Sve.
U., 4.19). Thus, he who is undeluded among the mortals understands Me as
'the great Lord of the worlds,' as the Lord of the lords of the worlds.
My nature is incompatible with association with evil which has to be
given up. What is called 'delusion' is the wrong knowledge of taking Me
as one among other entities of the same kind. To be bereft of this
delusion is to be 'undeluded'. Such a person is released from all sins
which stand against the rise of Bhakti to Me. The meaning is this: In
this world, the king who rules over men is only like all those men. He
has become a ruler by some good Karma. Such is not the case with the
Lord of the gods (the Supreme Being). Even the lord of the cosmic egg
(Brahma) is of the same class as other beings in Samsara, because he too
is a created being coming within the threefold classification of beings
according to the three innate tendencies for growth - namely
Karma-bhavana, Brahma-bhavana and Ubhaya-bhavana. These three are
described respectively as fitness to practise work alone, fitness to
practise meditation alone and fitness to practise both together. Brahma
comes under the third group. The Sruti also says, 'He who creates
Brahma' (Sve. U., 6.18). The same is the case with all those who have
acired the eight superhuman powers like becoming atomic etc. But I, the
Supreme Being, is the great Lord of the worlds. He who is not subject to
the delusion of regarding Me as of the same order as others, - such a
person knows Me as distinct in kind from non-conscient matter in its
states as cause and effect, from the self whether bound or free, and
from everything else, on account of all of them being subject to My
control. I am antagonistic to all that is evil and I am the sole centre
of innumerable auspicious attributes, unsurpassed and incomparable. It
is also My inherent nature to be the controller of everything. One who
understands Me to be all this is released from every sin. Thus, after
showing the annihilation, by meditation on His nature, of all evil
impeding the rise of Bhakti, and also of the rise of devotion, through
implication, by the destruction of such opposing factors, Sri Krsna now
explains the way in which Bhakti develops by meditation on His sovereign
power and on the multitude of His auspicious attributes:
