+++
title = "04 बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोहः"

+++
10.4 - 10.5 'Intelligence' is the power of the mind to determine.
'Knowledge' is the power of determining the difference between the two
entities - non-sentient matter and the individual self. 'Non-delusion'
is freedom from the delusion of perceiving as silver the mother-of-pearl
etc., which are different from silver etc., previously observed.
'Forbearance', is a non-disturbed state of mind, even when there is a
cause for getting disturbed. 'Truth' is speech about things as they are
actually seen, and meant for the good of all beings. Here, the working
of the mind in conformity with the ideal is intended, because the
context is with reference to the working of the mind. 'Restraint' is the
checking of the outgoing organs from their tendency to move towards
their objects and generate evil. 'Self-control' is the restraint of the
mind in the same manner. 'Pleasure' is the experience of what is
agreeable to oneself. 'Pain' is th experience of what is adverse.
'Exaltation' is that state of elation of the mind caused by experiences
which are agreeable to oneself. 'Depression' is the state of mind caused
by disagreeable experiences. 'Fear' is the misery which springs from the
perception of the cause of future sufferings. 'Fearlessness' is the
absence of such feelings. 'Non-violence' is avoidance of being the cause
of sorrow to others. 'Eability' is to become eable in mind whether good
or bad befalls and to look upon with the same eanimity on what happens
to oneself, friends and enemies. 'Cheerfulness' is the natural
disposition to feel pleased with everything seen. 'Austerity' is the
chastising of the body by denying to oneself pleasures, as enjoined by
the scriptures. 'Beneficence' is giving to another what contributes to
one's own enjoyment. 'Fame' is the renown of possessing good alities.
'Infamy' is notoriety of possessing bad alities. The workings of the
mind which are in accordance with fame and infamy must be understood
here, because it is the subject-matter of the context. Austerity and
beneficence are to be understood in the same way. All these mental
faculties - these functioning of the mind - resulting either in activity
or inactivity, are from Me alone, i.e., are dependent on My volition.
Sri Krsna declares: 'Thos agents who direct the creation, sustentation
etc., of all beings, have their activity dependent on My Will.'
