+++
title = "13 आहुस्त्वामृषयः सर्वे"

+++
10.12 - 10.13 Arjuna said You are He whom the Srutis proclaim as the
Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Light, the Supreme Sanctifier. Thus the
Srutis assert: 'From whom all these beings are born, by whom, when born,
they live and unto whom they go when they perish - desire to know that
well. This is Brahman' (Tai. U., 3.1.1); 'He who knows Brahman attains
the Highest' (Ibid., 2.1.1); and 'He who knows the Supreme Brahman
becomes the Brahman' (Mun. U., 3.2.9). Likewise He is the Supreme Light.
The term 'Dhaman' connotes light. He is the Supreme Light as taught (in
the Upanisads): 'Now, the light which shines higher than this heaven
৷৷.' (Cha. U., 3.13. 7); 'Attaining the Supreme Light. He appears with
His own form' (Ibid., 8.12.2); 'The gods worship Him as the Light of
lights' (Br. U., 4.4.16). So also He is the Supreme Sanctifier: He makes
the meditator bereft of all the impurities, and also destroyes them
without any trace. The Srutis declares: 'As water clings not to the leaf
of a lotus-flower, so evil deeds cling not to him who knows thus' (Cha.
U., 4.14.3): 'Just as the fibre of Isika reed (reed-cotton) laid on a
fire is burnt up, so also all his sins are burnt up' (Ibid., 5.24.3);
and 'Narayana is Supreme Brahman, Narayana is Supreme Light, Narayana is
Supreme Self' (Ma. Na., 9.4). Sages are those who know in reality the
higher truth (the Supreme Brahman), and the lower truth (individual
selves); they speak of You as the eternal Divine Person, Primal Lord,
the unborn and all-pervading. So also divine sage Narada, Asita, Devala
and Vyasa declare: 'This Narayana, Lord of Sri, the resident of the Milk
Ocean, has come to the city of Mathura abandoning his Serpent-couch.'
'Where Madhusudana is, there is the blessed Dvaravati. He is the Lord
Himself, the ancient One and Eternal Dharma (Ma. Bh. Vana. 88. 24-25).
Those who know the Vedas and those who know the self declare the
great-minded Krsna to be the eternal Dharma. Of all sanctifiers, Govinda
is said to be the most sanctifying, the most auspicious among the
auspicious. The lotus-eyed God of gods, the eternal, abides as the three
worlds ৷৷. Hari who is beyond thought, abides thus. Madhusudana is there
alone' (Ma. Bha. Vana., 88.24-28). Similarly it is stated: 'O Arjuna,
where the divine, the eternal Narayana the Supreme Self is, there the
entire universe, the sacred water and the holy shrines are to be found.
That is sacred, that is Supreme Brahman, that is sacred waters, that is
the austerity grove ৷৷. there dwell the divine sages, the Siddhas and
all those rich in austerities where the Primal Lord, the agent Yogin
Madhusudana dwells. It is the most sacred among the sacred. For you, let
there be no doubt about this' (Ibid., 90.28-32); 'Krsna Himself is the
origin and dissolution of all beings. For, this universe, consisting of
sentient and non-sentient entities, was generated for the sake of Krsna'
(Ma. Bha. Sabha., 38.23). And you yourself say so in the passage
beginning with 'Earth, water, fire, ether, mind, intellect and Ahankara
- this Prakrti, which is divided eightfold, is Mine' (7.4) and ending
with 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8).
