+++
title = "047 सकृद् अंशो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Once does the share fall to a man; once is a maiden given away; once does one say ‘I give’; each of these three comes only once.—(47)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अनुशयविधाव् अष्टमे (म्ध् ८.२२७) व्याख्यातः । विभागकाले हि समविषमांशभाग्भिः समविषमांशभागेषु[^१११] परिकल्प्य[^११२] विभागः कर्तव्यः । तत्र कृते यो विप्रतिपद्येत तस्य प्रतिषेधार्थम् इदम् । तत्रापि यद्य् अयम् आदाव् अयथार्थतां[^११३] कस्यचिद् अंशस्य प्रज्ञापयेत् तदा स्याद् एव[^११४] पुनर् विभागः । अथ बहुना कालेनायथाकृततां ब्रूयाद् यावद् इतरैः[^११५] स्वेषु स्वेषु भागेष्व्[^११६] अन्यनिवेशशीर्णप्रतिसंस्कारादि कृतं भवेत्, वस्त्रहिरण्यादि चोपयुक्तं स्यात्, तदा समतामात्रकरणे प्रभवति, न पुनः सर्वं समवायविभागम्[^११७] । 


[^११७]:
     M G: samavāpavibhāgam


[^११६]:
     M G: bhāgakeṣv


[^११५]:
     M G: itaḥ


[^११४]:
     M G: tadāsyaiva


[^११३]:
     M G: yady asāv ayathārthatāṃ; J yady ādāv eva yathārthatāṃ


[^११२]:
     M G: parikalayya


[^१११]:
     M G: -bhāgakeṣu

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु क्लीबादीनाम् अनर्हितविभागकानां पश्चाद् अभागहरत्वनिमित्तक्लीबत्वादिपरिज्ञानान् नास्ति भागोपहार इति सकृन् निपातप्रयोजनं वदन्ति । 

- एवं द्वित्रिचतुर्भागहराणां यदृच्छया ये समतां प्रकल्पयेयुः पश्चाद् अनुशयानाः[^११८] प्राक्तनं व्यवस्थानम् अतिक्रम्यापहर्तुं न[^११९] लभेरन् । पतितस्य तु लब्धभागस्याप्य् अपहारं वक्ष्यामि ।


[^११९]:
     M G omit: na


[^११८]:
     M G DK: anuśayanāt; J: anuśayanāḥ (my reading conjectural based on J)

- **सकृत् कन्या प्रदीयते** । यद्य् अपि चानेन वाग्दानोत्तरकालं प्राग् अपि विवाहाद् भर्तुः स्वतोच्यते, तथापि "दत्ताम् अपि हरेत् कन्याम्" (य्ध् १.६५), "तेषां तु निष्ठा विज्ञेया विद्वद्भिः सप्तमे पदे" (म्ध् ८.२२७) इत्यादिपर्यालोचनया विशिष्टविषयतैव । सा च व्याख्याता । **सकृद् आह ददामीति** । गवादयो हि येनैव रूपेणात्मनः स्वं तेनैवान्यस्मा आपद्यन्ते । कन्या तु दुहितृत्वेन स्वं सती भार्यात्वेनानिवृत्तस्वसंबन्धा दीयत इति पृथग् उपन्यासः ।

- <u>ननु</u> चानिवर्तमाने पितुः स्वसंबन्धे[^१२०] कथं कन्यादानं निर्वर्तते[^१२१] । एतद् धि दानस्य रूपं यद् एकस्य संबन्धो निवर्तते ऽन्यस्योपजायत इति । 


[^१२१]:
     M G: kanyādāne nivartate; J: kanyādānaṃ pravartate


[^१२०]:
     M G: svasaṃbandhaḥ

- <u>नैष दोषः</u> । द्वाव् अत्र संबन्धौ- अपत्यापत्यवद्भावः स्वस्वामिसंबन्धश् च । तत्रापत्यापत्यवद्भावो न निवर्तते, इतरस् तु निवर्तते । तथा च "बाल्ये पुतुर् वशे तिष्ठेत्" (म्ध् ५.१४६) इति पितुश् चात्र स्वाम्यनिवृत्तिम् आह "पाणिग्राहस्य" (म्ध् ५.१४६) इति भर्तुस् तद् उत्पत्तिम् ॥ ९.४७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This has been explained by us under the [section on ‘Rescision’
(8.227)].

At the time of partition, if the co-partners are such as are entitled to
equal as well as unequal shares, they should divide the property in such
equal and unequal shares. This partition having been once made, some one
of the co-partners may subsequently raise objections to it. It is such
subsequent objection that the ‘present verse is meant to preclude. If,
however, at the very outset, the party were to indicate the inadequacy
of his share, then, the partition should have to be revised. If, on the
other hand, the objecter should declare the inequity of the partition
after the lapse of a long time, all that he can claim is the
equalisation of his own share, and not a rescission of the whole
partition; since during the time that has elapsed each co-partner will
have made additions to his share, or carried out repairs to what may
have been in a dilapidated condition, or used up the clothes and gold
and other things \[so that a re-partition of the entire inheritance
would not be possible\].

Others, however, explain the declaration regarding ‘the share falling
only once’ to mean that—‘if after the partition, it be discovered
subsequently that there are some among the co-partners who are affected
by impotence or some such physical defect as disqualifies him from
receiving a share in the property,—there shall be no resumption of these
shares by the others.’

Similarly, if there be some co-partners who are really entitled to two,
three or four shares, but somehow at the time of partition, all of them
receive equal shares, then, if, after sometime, they were to complain,
they should not be permitted to annul the former partition.

In the case of the outcast, however, there is resumption of his share,
as we shall explain later on.

‘*The maiden is given away only once*.’—Though this would imply that the
husband acquires ownership over the girl immediately after verbal
betrothal,—even before the marriage has been performed,—yet what is
really meant is that particular time which is indicated by such
declarations as ‘One might take away a girl even though she may have
been betrothed’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 1.65) and ‘The marriage is to be
regarded as accomplished at the seventh step’ (*Manu*, 8.227). This we
have already explained above.

“*Once does one say ‘I give*’”—Cows and other things are given away to
others in the same form of ownership that, the giver himself has over
them; but the maiden belongs to the father as ‘daughter,’ while she is
given away to the other party as his ‘wife’; so that the father’s
relationship to her does not cease. It is for this reason that she has
been mentioned separately (in the sentence ‘the maiden is given away
only once’).

*Objection*.—“If the father’s ownership and relationship does not cease,
how can the ‘giving away of the maiden’ be said to be accomplished? It
is in the very nature of the act of *giving* that the ownership of one
ceases and that of another is brought about.”

There is no force in this objection. In the case in question there are
two relationships,—that of parent and child, and that of owner and
owned, and while the former remains intact, the latter does cease. This
is what is meant when verse 5.188 declares that ‘During childhood the
girl should remain under her father,’ and ‘under her husband during
youth,’ which indicates the cessation of the father’s ownership and the
coming into existence of that of the husband.—(27)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 490), which adds
that this rule regarding the betrothal of a girl pertains to cases where
the bridegroom to whom the girl has been betrothed has no disqualifying
defects;—in

*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 388), which adds that the
irrevocability of a partition here spoken of is meant for those cases
where all doubts regarding its fairness can be set at rest by reasonable
arguments;—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 145), and again on p. 182, where it
is added that this irrevocability of partitions is meant for cases where
the partition has been made by the objector himself;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 218), which explains the first clause to
mean that ‘a man obtains his share in a property only once,’ and adds
that what is said in regard to the ‘girl’ applies only to those cases
where there is no defect in the bridegroom (to whom the girl has been
betrothed).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.160).—‘He who, having promised his daughter to one suitor,
gives her in marriage to another, shall he punished as a thief;—unless
the first suitor have a blemish.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.65).—‘A maiden is given away hut once; having given her
away, if one takes her hack, he becomes liable to punishment; hut even
after giving her away, one may take her hack, if a better suitor should
arrive.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 94),—‘Even though he may have promised the girl
to a suitor, one may not give her to him if he happen to he beset with
vice.’

*Nārada* (12.28).—(Same as Manu.)

Do. (12.32).—‘When a man, after having made a solemn promise of marrying
his daughter to a certain suitor, does not deliver her afterwards, he
shall be punished by the King like a thief, in case the suitor be free
from defects.’

Do. (Aparārka, p. 94).—‘If even after betrothal, some defect is found in
either the bride or the bridegroom, the betrothal may be cancelled;
there is no finality in mere betrothal.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.)—‘If, after betrothal, the bridegroom becomes lost, the
girl shall wait for three months and then select another man. If a girl
has been betrothed to one and married to another, she shall be given
away, even after the performance of the ceremonies, to the person to
whom she had been previously promised.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘If the bridegroom happen to die after the girl has
been given away with water and verbally,—hut has not gone through the
ceremonies with mantras,—she remains an unmarried maiden with her
father.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कन्यातो अन्यद् अपि देयद्रव्यं दाता प्रतिग्रहीत्रे । एवं च सति **त्रीण्य् एतानि सतां सकृत्** । अतश् च स पुनर्दानासंभवस् तस्याः । तथा च न बीजप्राधान्यं परपरिग्रीतायाम् । कथम् ॥ ९.४७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

047	Once is the partition (of the inheritance) made, (once is) a maiden given in marriage, (and) once does (a man) say,' I will give;' each of those three (acts is done) once only.
</details>
