+++
title = "052 फलन् त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If between the owner of the soil and the owner of the seed, there has been no compact regarding the produce, then the chops belong clearly to the owner of the soil;—the receptacle being more important than the seed.—(52)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अविशेषेणोक्तं क्षेत्रिणां फलं न बीजिनः । तस्यावशिष्टविषयत्वम् आह- **अनभिसंधायेति** । अभिसंधानं बीजक्षेत्रिणोर् इतरेतरसंविद्व्यवस्थापनम्, नष्टाश्वदग्धरथवत् । "उभयोर् आवयोः फलम् अस्तु" इति यत्र वचनव्यवस्था न भवति तत्र **क्षेत्रिण एव प्रत्यक्षो ऽर्थो** निश्चितं फलम् । **प्रत्यक्ष**शब्देन निःसंदिग्धताम् आह । यतो **बीजाद् योनिर् बलीयसी** । क्षेत्रम् अधिकबलम् ॥ ९.५२ ॥

_सत्यां तु संविदि_ ।
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been stated in a general way that the produce belongs to the
owner of the soil, not to that of the seed; a further detail in regard
to this is now added.

‘*When no compact has been made*’—*i.e*., no agreement between the owner
of- the soil and the seed, as to the produce belonging to both, in
accordance with the maxim relating to two men, one of whom had lost his
horse and another had burnt his chariot, (where the fruit, in the shape
of being carried, accrued, by agreement, to both),—‘*the crop*’—*i.e*.,
the produce—‘*belongs clearly to the owner of the soil*’— The term
‘*clearly*’ indicates that there is no doubt on this point.

‘*Because the receptacle is more important than the seed*’—*i.e*., more
importance attaches to the soil,—(52) In a case however, where there is
a compact, (what happens is as follows.)—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 579), which explains the
meaning to be:—‘In a case where the owner of the field and the sower of
the seed are not parties to an agreement, the benefit accrues to the
former and not to the latter.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 3?0), which adds the
following explanation:—In a case where the ‘field-owner’ and the
‘seed-owner’ have entered into an agreement that ‘the child born would
belong to both of us,’ the child that is bora of the connection between
the former’s wife and the latter shall belong to both; but where there
has been no such agreement, and yet the latter ‘sows his seed’ in the
former’s ‘field,’ and a child is bora, it will belong to the
‘field-owner,’ and not to the ‘seed-owner;’ because the ‘receptacle’ is
more potent than the ‘seed,’ as is found in the case of the cow, the
sheep and other animals.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 656), which adds that
‘*phalānabhisandhāna*’ means the ‘absence of any such agreement as that
the child horn of this connection shall belong to both of us;’so that
the son thus born would be ‘*kṣetraja*’ and not ‘*dvyāmuṣyāyaṇa*.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.127), which adds a note the exact wording
of which has been reproduced in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 350)
\[see above\]. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following explanation of the verbal
construction:—‘*Kṣeṭriṇām bījinām*,’ ‘from among field-owners and
seed-owners,’ if either party has not agreed to the understanding
regarding the lending of the ‘field,’ then the child born belongs to the
‘field-owner;’ and the reason for this lies in the fact that ‘the
receptacle is more potent than the seed’;—and the reason for this is
declared to be ‘*pratyakṣam*,’ ‘ordinary perception’, *i*. *e*., such is
actually found to be the case in ordinary experience;—the ‘*phalam*’
spoken of in the text stands for the *agreement* regarding the child;—it
goes on to add that according to Medhātithi this verse serves to point
out the special circumstance under which the ‘benefit does not accrue to
the seed-sower,’ which has been stated in general terms in the preceding
verse.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 653);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 185b), which adds the following explanation—‘In a case where
there has been no agreement regarding the *phala*, *i.e*., the expected
offspring,—the child belongs to the woman’s husband, just as we find in
the case where, without the knowledge or consent of the owner of the
field, if some one sows his own seeds in that field, the outturn of the
field belongs to the owner of the field, and not to that of the seeds.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.48-56)  
**

[(See the texts under
31-44.)]

See Comparative notes for [Verse
9.48].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति **फलं त्व् अनभिसंधायेति** वचनात् ।
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

052	If no agreement with respect to the crop has been made between the owner of the field and the owner of the seed, the benefit clearly belongs to the owner of the field; the receptacle is more important than the seed.
</details>
