+++
title = "059 देवराद् वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On failure of issue, the woman, on being authorised, may obtain, in the proper manner, the desired offspring, either from her younger brother-in-law or from a ‘Sapiṇḍa’.—(59)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सर्वविशेषेण विशिष्टो ऽनेन नियोगो विधीयते । **संतानस्य परिक्षये नियुक्तया** देवरादिभ्यः **सम्यक्** प्रजोत्पादयितव्येति । यद् उक्तम् "योषितां धर्मम् आपदि" (म्ध् ९.५६) इति सेयम् आपत् **संतानस्य परिक्षयः** । **संतान**शब्देन पुत्र उच्यते, दुहिता च पुत्रिका । सा हि पितृवंशं संतनोति[^१२६] नान्या । तस्य **परिक्षयो** ऽनुत्पत्तिर् उत्पन्ननाशो वा पुत्रिकायाश् चाकरणम्[^१२७] । न हि स्त्रियाः केवलायाः[^१२८] पुत्रिकायाम् अन्यस्मिन् वा पुत्रप्रतिनिधाव् अधिकार इति वक्ष्यामः । नियुक्तोत्पादयेद् अनुज्ञाता[^१२९] गुरुभिः । 


[^१२९]:
     M G: anujñātayā


[^१२८]:
     M G: kevalāyāṃ


[^१२७]:
     M G: ca karaṇam; after this M G add: kevalāyā na hi putrikāyāś ca putrasya karaṇaṃ


[^१२६]:
     M G: tanoti

- <u>कुतः</u> पुनः गुरुभिर् इति ।

- <u>स्मृत्यन्तरनिदर्शनात्</u> । अथ वा नियोगशब्दाद् एव । नियोगो[^१३०] हि गुरुसंबन्धी लोको ऽप्य् उच्यते । न हि शिष्येण[^१३१] नियुक्तो ऽध्यापयतीत्य् उच्यते । आचार्येण नियुक्तः करोत्य् अनुवदति[^१३२] । गुरवश् च श्वश्रूश्वशुरदेवरादयो भर्तृसगोत्रा द्रष्टव्याः, न पित्रादयः । एतेनापत्येनापत्यवन्तस् ते उच्यन्ते[^१३३] येषां चोपकारस् तत्कृत और्ध्वदेहिको भवति । 


[^१३३]:
     M G add: tarhi viśeṣeṇa


[^१३२]:
     J: vadati (but Jha's translation appears to presuppose anuvadati)


[^१३१]:
     M G: viśeṣeṇa


[^१३०]:
     M G: niyoge

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं मातामहस्यापि दौहित्रोपकारो ऽस्ति । ततः पित्रा दुहिता नियोक्तव्येत्य् आपन्नम् । 

- <u>उक्तम्</u>, येनापत्यवन्त उच्यन्ते । देवरसपिण्डग्रहणेन[^१३४] तद्गोत्रा एव हृदयम् आगच्छन्ति । महाभारते च तत्र तत्र नियोक्तृभावो भर्तृपक्षिणाम् एव दर्शितः । अत एव भ्रातृपुत्रे सति न नियोगः कर्तव्यः । 


[^१३४]:
     M G: -grahaṇatvena

- <u>ये हि</u> नियुक्तास्[^१३५] तेषाम् एव संतानोपकारः । पुत्रजनिते स्नेहे ऽपत्योपकारम् अर्थयमाना अधिक्रियन्ते । न मृतस्याधिकारो ऽस्ति । कथं तर्हि तस्यापत्यम् इति व्यपदिश्यते ।


[^१३५]:
     M G: na yuktās

- <u>कथंचित्</u> पिण्डदाने स उपकरोति । वचनाद् इति च ब्रूमः । न ह्य् अपत्यम् उत्पादयितव्यम् इत्य् एष विधिस् तेनानुष्ठित इति, तथापि तदीये क्षेत्रे नियोगविधिजातेन पिण्डदानादि कर्तव्यम् इति शास्त्रार्थः । ततश् च तस्योपकारकम् अवगतम् । यथा चैतत् तथा पुरस्तान् निपुणं वक्ष्यामः ।

- **देवरः** पतिभ्राता । **सपिण्डः** पत्यन्वयः । स एव स्त्रियाः[^१३६] । स्मृत्यन्तरे जातिमात्राच् चेत्य् उक्तं भवति । **सम्यग्** इति घृताक्तादिनियमं वक्ष्यमाणम् अनुवदति । **प्रजेप्सिताधिगन्तव्या** विधौ कृत्ये । ईप्सितशब्देन कार्यक्षमताम्[^१३७] आह । ततो दुहितर्य् अन्धबधिरादौ च जाते पुनर् नियोगो ऽनुष्ठेयः ॥ ९.५९ ॥


[^१३७]:
     M G: kāryākṣamatām


[^१३६]:
     M G: striyāṃ; J omits: sa eva striyāṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse enjoins the practice of ‘*Niyoga*’, hemmed in by all its
qualifications.

‘On *failure of issue, the woman, on being authorised, may obtain,
offspring in the proper manner*,’—from her younger brother-in-law and
others.

This ‘*failure of issue*’ is the ‘distress’ referred to under verse 56.

The term ‘*issue*’, ‘*antāna*’, here stands for the *son*; as regards
the *daughter*, she is regarded as^(‘)issue’ only when she has been
‘appointed,’ as it is only then that she *carries on* (‘*santanoti*’),
perpetuates, her father’s family; which is not done by the daughter, in
ordinary circumstances.

The ‘*failure*’ of such issue consists in no son being born, or in a
son, though born, dying off, and in the *non-appointment* of a daughter
(by the husband). We shall explain later on that the woman is not
entitled to have an ‘appointed daughter’ or any other substitute for the
son. She may, therefore bring forth a child only when authorised by her
elders.

“Whence is the idea obtained that the authorisation is to be done *by
her elders*?”

It is obtained from other Smṛti-texts. Or, the idea follows from the
very name ‘*niyoga*’, ‘authorisation’. In ordinary parlance
‘authorisation’ is always understood as proceeding from a superior; when
the teacher does the teaching, he is not spoken of as being ‘authorised’
by his pupil to do it; in fact it is the pupil that is spoken of as
being ‘authorised’ to read and repeat the lessons.

The ‘*elders*’ meant here are the mother-in-law, the father-in-law, the
younger brother-in-law and other persons belonging to her husband’s
family,—and not the woman’s own father and other relations. Because if a
child is born as the result of this ‘authorisation’, it is only the
former who come to be known as ‘with offspring’, and who become
benefitted by the after-death rites performed by that child.

“If that were the sole criterion, then, since the child’s maternal
grandfather also would benefit by the rites performed by his
grand-child, it would follow that the said ‘authorisation’ could be done
by him also.”

This has been already answered by the explanation that those persons
alone are to ‘authorise’ who would become known as ‘with offspring’
through the child born as the result of that authorisation. Further,
when the verse speaks of the ‘*younger brother-in-law*’ and the
‘*sapiṇḍa*’, all persons belonging to the same *gotra* come to the mind.
In the *Mahābhārata* also, in several places, it is shown that
‘authorisation’ can proceed only from the woman’s relations on the
husband’s side. It is for this same reason that there is to be no
‘authorisation’ when the husband’s brother’s son is present.

“As a matter of fact, the benefits from the issue occur to only those
persons who are ‘authorised’ to beget the offspring; in fact only those
persons are entitled to ‘authorisation’ who are eager to obtain the
benefits of the issue, in the shape of the love and satisfaction derived
from the son. Thus then, no benefits can occur to one who is dead; how
then can the child be said to be the ‘issue’ of the latter?”

Our answer to this is that the dead person also does obtain benefits, in
the shape of the offering of libations and so forth; and that this is so
is clearly asserted in authoritative texts. Though it is true that the
dead person has not carried out the injunction regarding the begetting
of a child; yet the scriptures clearly lay down that libations are
offered to him by the child that may be begotten in the ‘soil’ belonging
to him, (*i.e*. on his wife), according to the law of ‘authorisation’.
And from this it follows that benefits for the issue do accrue to the
dead father also. How this is we shall explain fully later on.

‘*Younger brother-in-law*’—the husband’s brother.

‘*Sapiṇḍa*’—a person belonging to the husband’s family. This is what is
understood to be meant by the law in other Smṛti-texts regarding the
child being obtained from any person ‘*of the same caste*’.

‘*In the proper manner*’.—This refers to the rules regarding the man
annotating himself with clarified butter and so forth.

‘*The desired offspring may be obtained*’— The verbal affix has the
force of the Injunctive. The term ‘*desired*’ indicates the capacity for
fulfilling his duties; which implies that in the event of a girl or a
blind or deaf son being born, the process of ‘authorisation’ may be
repeated.—(59)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 9.59-60)  
**

‘*Santānasya*’—‘Son, and also the appointed daughter’
(Medhātithi);—‘Son’ (Govindarāja and Rāghavānanda).

“This practice is forbidden in Āpastamba 2.27.2-7; if the husband is
alive; but with the widow, it is expressly enjoined by Gautama 78.4 and
28.21-22, and Vaśiṣṭha 17.56. Nārada gives an elaborate account of the
formalities. See Jolly, Recht. Stellung S. 18, where the passage is
discussed.”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.127) as propounding the practice
of ‘*niyoga*’ for the purpose of forbidding it under verse 64 *et
seq*.—*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the notes:—‘*Samyak*,’ in accordance with the
scriptures,—‘*īpsitā*,’ in the form of a son,—‘*kṣaye*,’ in the event of
threatened extinction of the family; this means that the practice is
sanctioned only under very abnormal circumstances;—‘*vāg-yataḥ*,’
silent;—it then goes on to quote Medhātithi.

\(59\) is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 445)—and both the verses in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 350); and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra,
p. 737) which remarks that the term ‘*vidhavā*’ in this verse stands for
the girl whose betrothed husband has died after the betrothal, but
*before* actual marriage.

Both verses are quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 700);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 38a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
pp. 224-225), which explains the meaning as—“The widow, when directed by
the father-in-law or other elders, may beget a desired (*i.e*., male)
child from her husband’s (elder or younger) brother,—but only one;
although some people hold that she may secure two sons.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

(See below, verse 64 *et seq*.)

*Gautama* (18.4-7).—‘A woman whose husband is dead and who desires
offspring may bear a son to her brother-in-iaw. She should obtain the
permission of her elders and should have intercourse during her period
only. On failure of her brother-in-law, she may obtain offspring from a
*Sapiṇḍa*, a *Sayotra*, a *Samānapravara* or from one belonging to the
same caste. Some people hold that she should do this with none hut her
brother-in-law.’

Do. (28.22-23).—‘The widow may seek to raise up offspring to her
deceased husband. A son begotten on a widow, whose brother-in-law is
alive, by another relative, is excluded from inheritance.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.4.9-10).—‘After the expiry of six months from her
husband’s death, she may, with the authority of her elders, bear a son
to her brother-in-law, in case she has no son. They quote the
following:—“A barren woman or one who has already borne sons, or one who
is past childhearing, or one whose children are all dead, or one who is
unwilling, must never be authorised or appointed to do this.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.56).—‘After the completion of six months from the death
of her husband, she shall bathe, and offer a funeral oblation to the
husband. Then her father and brother shall assemble the elders who
taught or sacrificed for her husband, as also his relatives, and
authorise her to raise issue to her deceased husband. One should not
thus appoint a widow who is either mad or ill-behaved or diseased; nor
one who is very aged;—sixteen years after maturity is the period for
authorising a widow. Nor shall such an authorisation be made if the male
entitled to approach her is sickly.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.68-69).—‘If a widow is without a son, her
brother-in-law, or a *Sapiṇḍa* or a *Sagotra*,—smeared with butter,
shall approach her during her period, being authorised to do so by the
elders, for the purpose of obtaining a son for her. He shall approach
her only till conception has taken place; doing otherwise, he would
become an outcast. The son born in this manner is called *Kṣetraja*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.12-14).—‘The *Niyoga* (authorisation of a widow to raise
offspring to her deceased husband), after having been declared by Manu,
has been forbidden by himself; on account of the deterioration in the
nature of the time-cycles, this cannot he done by all in the proper
form. In the *Kṛta*, *Tretā* and *Dvāpara* cycles, men were imbued with
austerities and with knowledge; in the *Kali* cycle a deterioration in
the capacity of men has been brought about. Therefore the sons that were
obtained by various methods by the ancient sages cannot he obtained by
men now, on account of their being without that capacity.’

*Nārada* (12.80-81).—‘Should the husband of a childless woman die, she
should go to her brother-in-law, through desire to obtain a son, after
having received the necessary authorisation from her elders;—and he
shall have intercourse with her till a son is born. When a son is born,
he must leave her. It would be sinful intercourse otherwise.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 97).—‘On the death of her husband, or on
her having abandoned her husband, a woman may beget a son from a man of
her own caste. If she is a child-widow, or has been forcibly abandoned
by her husband, she shall go through the sacrament of marriage again,
with any other man. But this remarriage of women, or the begetting of a
son from the brother-in-law, or the freedom of women, should not be
permitted during the *Kali* age; as during this age, men are inclined to
be sinful.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.2-4).—‘A husband shall not make over his wife, who
occupies the position of a *gentilis*, to others (than to his
*gentiles*), in order to cause children to be begotten for himself. For
they declare that a bride is given to the family of her husband (and not
to the husband alone). This is forbidden for the present age, on account
of the incapacity of men’s senses.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 446).—‘A man desirous of securing offspring
for bis dead brother, may beget a child on his widow; he shall leave her
as soon as conception has taken place; he shall never approach her after
she has got a child.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., 449).—‘After having carried out *Niyoga*, one should
perform the prescribed penance for expiation.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति ज्येष्ठकनिष्ठाव् उभाव् अपि **देवर**शब्देन [विज्ञेयौ । अत एव तयोर् अविशे]षापेक्षो नियोग इति गम्यते । तथा च वक्ष्यति- "निजो विन्देत देवरः" इति । आपत् सन्तानाभावो ऽनुत्पन्नापत्यतया मृतपु[त्रत्वेन वा । अन्ये तु वर्णय्]अन्ति- "पश्येच् चेज् जीवतो मुखम्" इति वचनात्, जन्मनैव कृतो ऽनेन सन्तत्यर्थ इति । तद् अयुक्तम्, शास्त्रविरोधात् । एवं हि श्रूयते- "तस्मात् पुत्रम् अनुशिष्टं [तल्लोक्यम् आहुस् तस्माद् एनम् अनुशासति]" इति वाजसनेयिनां संप्रतिविधाव् एतद् रहस्यब्राह्मणम् । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम्- "सत्पुत्रशिष्यास् त्रायन्ते" इति । एवं च मृतपुत्रस्यापि नियोगः । तथा चाविशेषशास्त्रम् इदं **सन्तानस्य परिक्षय** इति । यथानुत्पन्नपुत्रस्य सन्तानपरिक्षयः एवं विनष्टस्यापीत्य् अयम् उच्यते । यतः कालसामान्याद् उक्त उभयत्रापि नियोगः । एवं च सति "द्वितीयम् एके प्रजनम्" इत्य् एतद् युक्तरूपं भवति । इदानीम् उपगमविधिर् अयम् उच्यते ॥ ९.५९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

059	On failure of issue (by her husband) a woman who has been authorised, may obtain, (in the) proper (manner prescribed), the desired offspring by (cohabitation with) a brother-in-law or (with some other) Sapinda (of the husband).
</details>
