+++
title = "064 नाऽन्यस्मिन् विधवा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By twice-born persons the widow shall not be ‘authorised’ in regard to another person; by ‘authorising’ her in regard to another, they would violate the eternal law.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेण विहितस्य नियोगस्य प्रतिषेधो ऽयम् । 

- <u>तत्र केचिद्</u> विधवाग्रहणान् मृतभर्तृकायाः प्रतिषेधः, क्लीबेन तु पत्या नियोक्तव्येति[^१५३] विधिप्रतिषेधौ विभक्तविषयाव् इति प्रतिपन्नाः । 


[^१५३]:
     M G: patyādaniyoktavyeti

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> विधिवाक्ये संतानविच्छेदस्य निमित्तश्रवणात् तस्य च क्लीबव्याधितयोर् मृतस्याप्य् उपपत्तिः । तथा च विधिवत् प्रतिषेधो[^१५४] ऽप्य् अविशिष्ट एव । अपेतधवसंबन्धा विधवेत्य् उच्यते । तत् तुल्यम् उभयत्रापि । 


[^१५४]:
     M G: upapattibhedaḥ | na ca vidhyabhāvapratiṣedho; DK: upapattibhedena vidhivat pratiṣedho

- अवश्यं चैतद् एवं विज्ञेयम् । इतरथा घृताभ्यक्तादिनियमो ऽपि क्लीबेन नियुज्यमानाया न स्यात् । तत्रापि ह्य् आमनन्ति- "विधवायां नियुक्तश् च घृताक्तः" (म्ध् ९.६०) इति । तस्माद् विहितस्याविशेषेण प्रतिषेधो ऽप्य् अविशिष्टः[^१५५] । अतश् च विषयसमत्वे विधिनिषेधयोर् विकल्पः । अयं च नित्यो ऽपत्योत्पादनविधिर्[^१५६] विकल्प एव कल्पते, ग्रहणाग्रहणवत् । 


[^१५६]:
     M G add: na


[^१५५]:
     M G: 'pyaśiṣṭaḥ

- <u>यदा</u> तु "पुत्रेण जयति" (म्ध् ९.१३७) इत्येवमादिफलोत्पादनविधिस् तदासत्य् अपत्ये तत्कार्यस्यौर्ध्वदेहिकस्योपकारस्याभावाद् भिन्नफलयोः कुतो विकल्पः । समानविषयौ विधिनिषेधाव् एकर्थे विकल्प्येते[^१५७] । षोडशीग्रहणाग्रहणयोर् इति केचित् । 


[^१५७]:
     M G DK: vikalpete

- <u>उक्तम्</u> अङ्गभूयस्त्वे फलभूयस्त्वम् । प्रधानकार्यसिद्धौ त्व् अविशेषः । तस्माद् अस्मिन् पक्षे पुत्रोपकाराभावम् आह । उपकारविशेषार्थेनास्य प्रवृत्तौ प्रतिषेधातिक्रमेण श्येनतुल्यता । 

- इदं त्व् अत्र निरूप्यम् । यो ऽसौ नियुज्यते स किम् इति प्रवर्तते । न हि तस्य विधिर् अस्ति- "नियुक्तेन गन्तव्यम्" इति । स्त्रियाः पुनर् विद्यते "सम्यक् स्त्रिया नियुक्तया" (म्ध् ९.५९) इति । न च[^१५८] "देवरादिषु प्रवर्तमानेषु स्त्रिया नियोगसिद्धिर् इत्य् अर्थः । तेषां अपि प्रवृत्तिस्[^१५९] तद्विधिना क्षेत्रज ईप्सितः" इति वाच्यम् । यतो रागतः प्रवृत्तिर् उपपद्यते[^१६०] । घृताक्तादिनियमविधानम् अनर्थकम् इति चेन् नानर्थकम् । तथानियमैर् उत्पन्ने क्षेत्रजव्यपदेशो नान्य इति । 


[^१६०]:
     M G: udyate


[^१५९]:
     M G: api vṛddhis


[^१५८]:
     M G: tu

- <u>यद् अपि</u> गुरुवचनं कर्तव्यम् इति केचित् प्रवृत्तिनिबन्धनम् आहुः । 

- <u>एवं सति</u> सुरापानादिष्व् अपि गुर्विच्छया प्रवृत्तिः प्राप्नोति । न चासौ गुरुर् अकार्ये यः प्रवर्तयति,

- गुरोर् अप्य् अवलिप्तस्य कार्याकार्यम् अजानतः ।

- उत्पथप्रतिपन्नस्य परित्यागो विधीयते ॥

इति स्मरणात् । परित्यागश् च गुरुकार्यान् निवृत्तिः । 

- एतेनैतद् अपि प्रत्युक्तम्- यन् नियमातिक्रमपातित्यवचनं नियमपूर्विकां वृत्तिम् अनुजानाति "ताव् उभौ पतितौ स्याताम्" (म्ध् ९.६३) इति । इतरथा सर्वप्रकारं गच्छतः पातित्यम् इति विशेषपातित्यम् अनुपपन्नम् । यतस् तन् न केवलस्य पुंसः श्रूयते, किं तर्हि स्त्रिया इति । तस्याश् च पुत्रार्थिन्या[^१६१] नियोगो विहितः । तदपेक्षं[^१६२] हि व्यतिक्रमे पतितवचनम् "ताव् उभौ पतितौ स्यायाम्" (म्ध् ९.६३) इति । असति व्यतिक्रम एकः पतितः पुमान् एव, अतिक्रमे तु द्वाव् अपीत्य् एवम् अपि लिङ्गान् निर्गच्छत्य्[^१६३] एव । 


[^१६३]:
     M G: liṅgāni gacchanty


[^१६२]:
     M G DK: tadapekṣyaṃ


[^१६१]:
     Perhaps the reading should be cāputrārthinyā. That the widow should not get niyoga because she wants children is expressed elsewhere by Medhātithi: MDh 9.64 (_upakāraviśeṣārthenāsya pravṛttau pratiṣedhātikrameṇa śyenatulyatā_) and especially MDh 5.157 (_niyogas tu navame gurvicchayā vihito nātmatantratayā putrārthinyāḥ. _I thank David Brick for pointing this out.

- <u>तस्माद्</u> देवरादिविधिलक्षणा[^१६४] प्रवृत्तिः कथम् इति वक्तव्यम् । 


[^१६४]:
     M G: -lakṣaṇaḥ

- <u>उच्यते</u> । व्यासादिदर्शनेनापत्यपिण्डदान इव क्षेत्रजोत्पत्त्यर्थं सपिण्डानां गुरुनियोगापेक्षा । तदा नोपगमने च्युतिर् अस्तीत्य्[^१६५] अनुमन्तव्यम् । न हि महात्मनां रागलक्षणप्रवृत्तिर् अभ्युपगन्तुं न्याय्या । यच् चोक्तं नियमातिक्रमे पतितत्ववचनं लिङ्गम् इति, तद् अयुक्तम् । यतः पुंसः पतितत्वे पतितोत्पन्नस्याधिकाराभावाद् उत्पादनम् अनर्थकम् । तस्माद् अस्ति देवरादिविधेर् आभासो ऽयम् ॥ ९.६४ ॥


[^१६५]:
     M G DK: nāpagamena stutir astīty
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is the prohibition of the practice of ‘authorisation’, which has
been sanctioned in the foregoing texts.

In this connection, some people have held the following view:—“Inasmuch
as the text contains the term ‘*widow*’, it prohibits the practice only
with reference to the woman whose husband is dead; so that the impotent
husband should still ‘authorise’ his wife; both the sanction and the
prohibition would thus have distinct spheres of application.”

Others, however, have held the following opinion:—“The text, that
sanctions the practice mentions the *failure of issue* as the occasion
for it; and as a matter of fact, this occasion is equally present in
both cases,—in the case of the husband being impotent or invalided, as
also in that of his being dead. So that as the sanction, so the
prohibition also, must be accepted as free from restrictions. Then
again, a woman is called ‘*vidhavā*’ (widow) when she ceases to have any
intercourse with her ‘*dhava*’ or husband; and this condition is equally
present in both cases.”

It is this latter view that has to be accepted; as otherwise, the rules
regarding ‘anointment with clarified butter’ and other details would not
be applicable to the case of ‘authorisation’ by the impotent or
invalided husband; because the text that lays down that rule uses the
term ‘widow’—“He who has been authorised *in regard to the widow*, etc.’
(Verse 60). For these reasons, just as the preceding sanction, so the
subsequent prohibition also, should be taken as free from all
limitations. And thus the sphere of application of both being the same,
we must take the case as being one of *option*. This option is possible
only in view of the obligatory character of the injunction regarding the
begetting of children; the case being analogous to the option bearing
upon the ‘holding’ and ‘not holding’ of the *Śoḍaśi* Cups. If, on the
other hand, the injunction of begetting a son were regarded as
consisting in such assertions as ‘by means of a son one wins heaven’,
and so forth, (where the act of begetting a son is put forward as
loading to a certain desirable result), the effect of one having no
children would only be the non-performance of the after-death rites. So
that the results of the two acts (begetting of a child by
‘authorisation’ and not begetting a. child by that method) would be
totally distinct; and under the circumstances, whence could there he any
*option*? It is only when the sanction and the prohibition both hear
upon the same object that there can be *option*; as is the case with the
‘holding’ and ‘not holding’ of the *Śoḍaśi* Cups.

It has already been pointed out that when an act is done along with all
its subsidiary details, its results are fuller than what they are when
it is done without those details; but so far as the accomplishment of
the main act itself is concerned, there is no difference. So that, in
this case the only effect would be that the man not having recourse to
the practice would fail to obtain the benefits that would he conferred
by the son; and if he has recourse to the practice with a view to
obtaining those special benefits, then he would he transgressing the
prohibition, and his act would stand on the same footing as the
performance of the *Śyena* sacrififie (which is performed for the
special purpose of obtaining the death of the enemy, and involves the
transgression of the prohibition of all *hilling*).

“In connection with this object, the following point deserves to be
considered in regard to the man who is ‘authorised’ (to have connection
with the ‘widow’)—Why does he have recourse to the act? There is no such
injunction for him as that ‘when one is *authorised* he should have
intercourse with the widow’; as there *is* for the woman, in the form of
the text (59)—‘the woman, being duly authorised, etc.’ It would not be
right to argue that—“since the ‘authorisation’ of the woman can he
accomplished only when her younger brother-in-law or some other male
relation would also ad, the action of these latter also is implied by
that same injunction (which prescribes the^(‘)authorisation’ of the
woman),—since what is desired by the women is the *Kṣetraja* son (and
this cannot be obtained without the action of the male).”

“This cannot be right, because the action of tin; male might proceed
from carnal desire also.

“If the injunction did not imply the action of the male, there would be
no sense in the rules laying down *anointing with clarified butter* and
other details.

“These rules would not he meaningless; as their meaning would he that
the son can he called ‘*Kṣetraja*’ only when he is born in the manner
prescribed, and in no other circumstances.

“Some people have leld that the general injunction that ‘one must obey
the injunction of his elders’ is what prompts the male in question.

“But if this were allowed, then one would he justified in drinking wine
and doing such forbidden ads, by the wish of his elders to do so. As a
matter of fact, one who would prompt the man to have recourse to such
acts would not be an ‘elder’ at all. Then again, there is the law—‘The
abandoning of the elder is enjoined, if he is vain or ignorant of what
should and what should not be done, or has recourse to the wrong path’;
and the ‘abandoning’ meant here can only consist in *ceasing to work for
the elder*.

“This same reasoning does away with the following view also:—‘The
assertion, (in 63) that by acting contrary to the rules relating to the
details of the practice of ‘authorisation,’ the parties concerned become
outcasts, implies the sanctioning of the action of both, in accordance
with those rules. Otherwise, if the action of the man involved the
penalty of outcasting in all kinds of intercourse, there would be no
point in the declaration that he becomes an outcast under the special
circumstances (of acting contrary to the rules).’

“Then again, the idea, that—‘in the case of there being no transgression
of the rules the man alone becomes an outcast, whereas, when there is
transgression of them, both parties become outcasts’—is also derived
from the indicative power of the texts themselves.

“Thus then, the action of the youger brother in-law and other male
relations has got to be explained (and justified).”

Our explanation is as follows:—Judging from the instance of Vyāsa and
others, it has to be admitted that, in the begetting of the ‘*Kṣetraja*’
son, if one acts according to the behests of his elders, there can be
nothing wrong in it In the case of Vyāsa and other great men, their
action can never be regarded as having been prompted by carnal desire.’
Then, as for the argument that “the assertion that the parties become
outcasts if they transgress the rules, is indicative of the act of the
male”.—this cannot be right; for, if the male became an outcast, then,
the son born of him would not be entitled to the performance of any
rites; so that the begetting of the child would be absolutely futile.
From all this, it follows that there is just a semblance of an
injunction for the action of the younger brother-in-law or other male
relations.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Verses 64-68 flatly contradict the rules given in the preceding ones.
But it by no means follows that they are a modern addition, as held by
Hopkins. For the same view is expressed by Āpastamba, 2.27.2-6, and was
held, according to Baudhāyana, 2.3.34, by Aupajandhani. Moreover,
Bṛhaspati Smṛti states expressly (Colebrook Dig. CLVII) that the
contradictory statement occurred in the Mānava Dharmaśātra as known to
the author.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.136), as prohibiting
*niyoga*;—again under 2.127, to the same effect, where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds that ‘*anyasmin*’ means ‘other than the husband.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 737), which remarks that
the term ‘*vidhavā*’ here stands for the woman, whose husband has died
after the marriage has been performed;—then it seeks to reconcile the
apparent contradiction between verses 59 and 60 (permitting *Niyoga*) on
the one hand, and verses 64-68 (forbidding it) on the other; the
sanction is meant for the girl who is widowed after verbal betrothal,
before marriage; while the prohibition applies to one who is widowed
after marriage; this, it adds, is made clear by verse 65, which refers
to the ‘mantras recited during the marriage-ceremony.’ It concludes
therefore that there is no room for any doubts regarding the opinion of
Manu, adumbrated in *Mitākṣarā*.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 38a);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 226), which says that this prohibition is meant for the
*Kali-age*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 186a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.60-68)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
9.60].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

064	By twice-born men a widow must not be appointed to (cohabit with) any other (than her husband); for they who appoint (her) to another (man), will violate the eternal law.
</details>
