+++
title = "076 प्रोषितो धर्मकार्यार्थम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the husband went abroad for some sacred duty, he should be awaited for eight years; if for learning, or for fame, six years; but three years, if for pleasure.—(76)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उक्तं "कार्यवान् प्रवसेत् (म्ध् ९.७४) इति, तानि कार्याणि दर्शयति । तद्विशेषेण प्रतीक्षाकालभेदः । परतस् त्व् इदं तया कर्तव्यम् इति नोक्तम्[^१९१] । 


[^१९१]:
     M G: coktam

- <u>तत्र केचिद्</u> आहुः- प्रकरणाद् "अगर्हितैर् जीवेत् (म्ध् ९.७५) इति । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । प्राग् अस्मात् कालाद् अगर्हितैर् इतीयं किं म्रियताम् । न ह्य् अस्या अत्मत्याग इष्यते, पुंस इव प्रतिषिद्धत्वात् । तस्मात् प्राग् अप्य् अस्मात् प्रतीक्षणविधेर् अगर्हितैः शिल्पैर् अजीवन्ती गर्हितैर् जीवेत् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> व्यभिचारम् इच्छन्ति । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरे-

- नष्टे मृते प्रव्रजिते क्लीबे च पतिते पतौ ।

- पञ्चस्व् आपत्सु नारीणां पतिर् अन्यो विधीयते ॥ (न्स्म् १२.९७)

- <u>अन्ये ऽप्य्</u> आहुः । नास्या जातु[^१९२] ब्रह्मचर्यम् अपनेतुं शक्यते । स्त्रीधर्मेषु हि तद् अस्या विहितं मनुनापि- "न तु नामापि गृह्णीयात् पत्यौ प्रेते परस्य तु" (म्ध् ५.१५५) इति । मृते भर्तरि नास्ति व्यभिचारः, किम् अङ्ग प्रोषिते । पतिशब्दो हि पालनक्रियानिमित्तकः, ग्रामपतिः सेनायाः पतिर् इति । अतश् चास्माद् वचनाद् नैषा[^१९३] भर्तृपरतन्त्रा स्यात् । अपि त्व् आत्मनो जीवनार्थं सैरन्ध्रीकरणादिकर्मभिर्[^१९४] अन्यम् आश्रयेत । तच् च यदा षण्मसभृत्या संवत्सरभृत्या वा कस्मिंश्चिद् आश्रिते भर्ता यद्य् आगच्छेत् तदानीं तां चेद्[^१९५] वशीकर्तुं शक्नुयात् त्यज त्वं भार्याम् इति यावद् भवति कालो न पूर्णः,[^१९६] प्राक् पत्युर् एव सा, पञ्चमे चर्वितम् अन्यत् ।


[^१९६]:
     M G: pūrvaḥ


[^१९५]:
     M G DK: add: vaśīkuryād


[^१९४]:
     M G: -karmavad


[^१९३]:
     M G: abādhanaiṣā; DK: avadher naiṣā


[^१९२]:
     M G: nāsyājñāne; J: nāsyā jñānena

- <u>अन्ये ऽप्य्</u> अर्थम् इमम् आहुः । 

- <u>पूर्वे</u> तु पुनर्भूवृत्तम् इच्छन्ति । या पत्या वा परित्यक्ता भवति, यस्याः किल पतिर् इयन्तं कालं निहितवृत्तिको नागच्छति, सा तेन त्यक्तैव भवति । ततश् च यदि सा पुनर्भूधर्मेणान्येनोढा भवेत्, तदा भर्ताभ्यागतो न किंचिद् ब्रूयात् । पुनर् भवस्येयं भार्येति । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । "न निष्क्रयविसर्गाभ्याम्" (म्ध् ९.४६) इति तस्य श्लोकस्यार्थवत्त्वं दर्शयिष्यामः । 

- धर्मश् च तत्कार्यं च **धर्मकार्यं** । सो ऽर्थः प्रयोजनं प्रवासस्येति **धर्मकार्यार्थम्** । 

- <u>कुतः</u> । न गृहस्थस्य धर्मार्थो दीर्घकालः प्रवासः । अवश्यं ह्य् अग्नयस् तेन परिचरणीयाः । पाञ्चयज्ञिकम्[^१९७] अनुष्ठेयम् । कुतो गन्तव्यम् "वसन्ते वसन्ते ज्योतिषा यष्टव्यम्" इति । तीर्थस्नानादीन्य् अपि स्मार्थानि च श्रौताविरोधीन्य् अनुष्ठेयानि । न च[^१९८] संविधाय प्रोषितस्य वा बवन्तीति[^१९९] येनोच्यते "संविधायापि प्रवास आपर्वणः," "स्वयं पर्वणि जुहुयाद् ऋत्विजाम् एकतरकालम्" इति ह्य् उक्तम्[^२००] । अनाहिताग्नेस् तीर्थयात्रायां पाञ्चयज्ञिकस्य[^२०१] तुल्यत्वे ऽपि स्मार्तत्वे भार्यासहितस्योपपत्तेः न तत्त्यागे तीर्थगमनं युक्तम् । 


[^२०१]:
     M G J: pāñcayājñikasya


[^२००]:
     M G: ekatarakāla iti yuktam; J: ity uktam


[^१९९]:
     M G J: asaṃvidhāya


[^१९८]:
     J places na ca after bhavatīti; M G omits na ca and reads asaṃvidhāya


[^१९७]:
     J: pāñcayājñikam

- <u>उच्यते</u> । गुरुवचनेन, यं गुरवो धर्मार्जने राजोपसेवायां वा स्वकार्याय[^२०२] प्रेषयन्ति स धर्मार्थं प्रवासः । प्रायश्चित्तं वा तपोवनदेशभ्रमणेन । 


[^२०२]:
     M G: sukāryāya

- अथ वार्थार्जनार्थम् एव **धर्मकार्यार्थम्** अभिप्रेतम्- "दरिद्रो ऽहं कुतश्चिद् धनम् अर्जयिष्ये" ।

- **विद्यार्थम्** । 

- <u>ननु</u> स्नातस्य च भार्याधिगमः । कृतविद्यस्य च स्नानम् । तत्र कुतः कृतविवाहस्य विद्यार्थिता । 

- <u>दर्शितम्</u> एतत् । ईषदवगतवेदार्थो विवाहे ऽधिक्रियते, निश्चिते स्नानादौ ।

- <u>नैतद् युक्तम्</u> । कृतायां धर्मजिज्ञासायां स्नानं जिज्ञासा च विचारपूर्वकसंशयच्छेदेन निश्चितार्था[^२०३] । 


[^२०३]:
     M G DK: -cchedananiścitārthā

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । नायं विधिर् विद्यार्थितायाः । तथा च सति **धर्मकार्यार्थम्** इत्य् अनेनैवावगता स्यात् । उत्पन्ने ऽप्य् अधिकारोपयोगिन्य् अवगमे ऽभ्यासातिशयार्थं विशेषार्थं चान्यासु विद्यासु । क्षिप्रं शौर्ययशःख्यापनार्थं बहिः सविसेषविद्वत्वख्यापनार्थम्[^२०४] । देशान्तरप्रवसने यशोहेतुः प्रवासः ।


[^२०४]:
     M G: -vidyātva-

- **कामार्थं** रूपाजीवानुगमो ऽभिप्रेततरां भार्याम् उद्वोढुम् । स्मृत्यन्तरे प्रसूताभेदेन च कालभेदः स्मर्यते । तथा च विष्णुः- "अष्टौ विप्रसूताः षट् राजन्याः चतुरो वैश्या द्विगुणं प्रसूतेति । न शूद्रायाः कालनियमः स्यात् । संवत्सरम् इत्य् एके" इति ॥ ९.७६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said that a man may go abroad ‘on business’; the present
verse proceeds to show the several kinds of ‘business,’—the time of
waiting varying with the nature of the business.

The text has said nothing as to what the wife should do after having
waited for the eight years. And on this point, some people on the
strength of Context, say that she should maintain herself by
unobjectionable industries.

This however is not right Because, if the maintaining of herself by
unobjectionable industries referred to the time after the eight years of
waiting,—then, before the⁻ lapse of that time, is she to die? Suicide is
not considered desirable for her, just as it is not for the man; being,
as it is, forbidden for all. Hence, the conclusion appears to be that
before the lapse of the said time she shall maintain herself by
unobjectionable industries; but after that she may have recourse to
objectionable ones also.

Others hold that after the said time, the woman may deviate from
chastity;—as says smother Smṛti text—‘When the husband is lost, or dead,
or become a renunciate, or impotent, or an outcast—in the event of these
five calamities smother husband is permitted for women.’ (Parāśara).

Others again hold the following view:—Even in ignorance, it is not open
to the woman to renounce her chastity. In fact, it has been laid down
among the duties of women (under 5.156) that ‘on the death of her
husband she shall not even utter the name of another man’; so that
deviation from chastity is not permissible even on the death of her
husband,—what to say as to when he has only gone abroad. As regards the
Smṛti-text quoted, the word ‘*pati*’ ‘husband,’ is used there in the
sense of *protector*, just as in the case of such terms as
‘*grāmapati*’, ‘*senāpati*’ and so forth. So that all that the present
text means is that—‘she should no longer remain dependent upon her
husband, she may undertake the work of the toilet-maid or some such
thing, under another man who would give her food’; and when she has
entered into a contract for such service extending over six months, or a
year—if the husband happen to turn up and claim her, asking the employer
to give her up,—he can claim her restitution, before the lapse of the
eight years; as before that she belongs to her husband.

Other matters relating to this subject have been fully dealt with under
Discourse V.

This same view has been accepted by many others also.

Other people, however, hold that the text sanctions recourse to the life
of the ‘remarried widow’ (after the lapse of the time mentioned). If a
woman is abandoned by her husband,—or if her husband, after having made
provision for her, does not return during the said time, and she is as
good as abandoned by him,—‘then, she may he married by another man,
according to the practice of ‘widow remarriage’; and if the former
husband happen to return after that, he can say nothing, and she shall
continue to be the wife of the second husband.

This however is not right; since ‘neither by sale nor by repudiation is
the wife released from her husband.’ (Manu 9.46); and the uses of this
text we shall explain later on.

‘*For a sacred duty*’— The compound ‘*dharmakāryam*’ being explained as
a *karmadhāraya*—‘*dharma*’—‘sacred’—‘*kārya*’—duty; and that which is
for purposes of this is ‘*dharmakāryārtham*.’

*Objection*—“For the house-holder, wherefore should there he any
protracted journey abroad *for a sacred duty*? It is incumbent upon him
to attend upon the Fires, to perform the

Five Sacrifices. How too can he remain away during the spring season?
Since he has got to perform the *Jyotiṣ* -sacrifice during the spring.
Even such acts as bathing in sacred places and the like, which are
enjoined by *Smṛti* texts, have to be performed by him only so long as
they are compatible with those laid down by *Śruti* texts. These could
not be possible even for one who has gone abroad after having made
arrangements for the maintenance of the fires and other such *Śrauta*
rites. Since it has been laid down that ‘journeys, after proper
arrangements during absence, are permissible only till the next New or
Full Moon’; and it has also been declared that ‘on the New or Full Moon
Day the man shall pour the libations *himself*.’ Even for one who has
not laid the Fires, if pilgrimages were undertaken,—even though these
and the performance of the Five Sacrifices would stand upon the same
footing, both being laid down by *Smṛti* texts,—yet as both the acts are
laid down as to be done by him along with his wife, there should be no
pilgrimage if the wife were left behind.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What is said here refers to the
commands of one’s elders;—‘*i.e*., to the case where the man is sent out
by his elders, either for acquiring merit, a for attendance upon the
king, or on some business of their own,—this going abroad would be
‘*for* *a sacred duty*.’ Or, it may refer to the performance of such
Expiatory Rites as consist in wandering about hermitages and such
places. Or, ‘*for* *satred duty*’ may stand for the *acquiring of
wealth*,—the man being poor and seeking to earn wealth by some means.
‘Or *for the sake of learning*.’—

Objection—“But the taking of a wife is possible only.after one has taken
the Final Bath, which is possible only for one who has completed his
studies and already acquired learning; wherefore then could there be any
possibility for a married man to seek for *learning*?”

It has been already explained that even after learning a little of what
is contained in the Veda, a man becomes entitled to marry, and also to
the Final Bath and other Ceremonies.

“This cannot be right; there is Final Bath only after the ‘enquiry into
Dharma’ has been completed; and ‘enquiry’ consists in “coming to a
definite conclusion after due consideration and clearing of doubts.”

True; but the present text does not contain the injunction that ‘one
should seek for learning.’ If it were so, then it would be already
included under the ‘purpose of sacred duty’. Then again, even though the
man may have acquired sufficient learning to entitle him to Bath and
Marriage, yet it would be open to him to seek for further proficiency
and practice, specially in the new sciences.

Journey is said to be ‘for fame’, when one goes abroad for advertising
his bravery or learning.

‘*For pleasure*’,—for instance, when one follows a prostitute; or goes
about seeking for a more desirable wife.

Another *Smṛti* text lays down the period of time in reference to the
children born:—Says *Viṣṇu*—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall wait till eight children
are born, the Kṣatriya six and the Vaiśya four.’

There is no time-limit in the case of *Śūdras*. But some people declare
the limit in their case to be *one* *year*.—(76)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda hold that after the expiration of the
terms mentioned, the wife shall go to seek her husband. Nandana
says—‘the meaning is that no sin is committed if she afterwards takes
another husband’.—Medhātithi, having noted and dismissed two other
explanations—(a) that ‘she should maintain herself by blameless methods’
\[which is the explanation attributed to Medhātithi himself by Buhler\],
and (b) that ‘she may have intercourse with another man\*,—propounds the
explanation that ‘she may take service under another man as a
toilet-woman in his house, and on the return of her husband, she may
return to him, if he can induce her to go.’ He also notes and rejects
the explanation of the ‘ancients’ that ‘she may *marry* another man.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (12.98-101).—‘Eight years shall a Brāhmaṇa woman wait for the
return of her absent husband; or four years, if she has no issue; after
that she may betake herself to another man. A Kṣatriya woman shall wait
six years; or three years if she has no issue; a Vaiśya woman, for three
years if she has issue; otherwise, two years. No definite period is
prescribed for a Śūdra woman, whose husband has gone on a journey. Twice
the above periods is ordained for eases where the absent husband is
alive and tidings are received of him. The above rules have been laid
down for those cases where a man has disappeared. No offence is imputed
to a woman if she goes to live with another man after the fixed period
has elapsed.’

*Gautama* (18.15-17).—‘A wife must wait for six years, if her husband
has disappeared. If he is heard of, she shall go to him. But if the
husband has become a Renunciate, his wife must refrain from intercourse
with men. The wife of a Brāhmaṇa who has gone abroad for study must wait
for twelve years.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.75-80).—‘The wife of an emigrant shall wait for live
years. After five years have passed, she may go out to seek her husband.
If, for reasons connected with spiritual or pecuniary matters, she be
unwilling to leave her home, she must behave in the same manner as if
her husband were dead. In this manner a Brāhmaṇa woman with issue shall
wait five years, and one having no issue, four years; a Kṣatriya woman
with issue, five years, and one without issue, three years; a Vaiśya
woman with issue, five years, and one without issue, two years; a Śūdra
woman with issue, three years and one without issue, one year. After
that, she shall live among those who are united with her husband, in
interest, or by birth, or by the funeral cake, or by water-libations, or
by descent from the same family,—each earlier named person being more
venerable than the following one. But while any member of the family is
living, she shall never go to a stranger.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अगर्हितेनाजीवेद् इति । अविधायेत्य् अधिकारात् । तस्या एवायं कालनियमः, अगर्हितशिल्पजीवनेन । ऊर्ध्वं तु कालाद् एतस्माद् गर्हितेनापि जीवेच् छिल्पेन । एवं च विरुद्धशिल्पप्रतिप्रसवो ऽयं विज्ञेयः । **धर्मकार्यं** गुरुवचनादि । **कामार्थं** रूपाजीवनानुगमः । न तु व्यभिचारः, **प्रतीक्ष्यो ऽष्टौ नरः समाः** इत्य् एवमादिवचनाद्, येन शास्त्रविरुद्धस् तासां व्यतिक्रमः, अत्यन्तं संयमोपदेशात् । तथा च सति विधवानियोग एव तावत् कथंचिल् लब्धः, कुत एव व्यभिचारः । अन्यस् त्व् आह- अत ऊर्ध्वं व्यभिचारदोषाभावः, प्रतिप्रसवसामर्थ्यात् । न तु नियमेन व्यभिचारोपदेशः । न हि प्रोषिते ऽन्योढायोगो ऽस्ति यतो गुरुनियुक्तापत्यार्थं प्रवर्तते । एवं च सत्य् अत्यन्तम् अजीवन्त्याः प्राणवृत्तिमात्रार्थो रहसिजन्यो वा व्यभिचारमात्रप्रतिप्रसवो ऽयं विज्ञेयः । "या पत्या वा परित्यक्ता" इत्य् एवं परित्यागोपायजन्यपौनर्भवविषयः । तत् त्व् एतद् अत्यन्तशास्त्रविरोधाद् अयुक्तम् । अपरे त्व् इदं मनुष्याणाम् एव प्रवासकालनियमार्थं वर्णयन्ति । अतः परं प्रोषितस्यावस्थाने धर्मार्थम् अपि प्रत्यवायः स्याद् इति । यो ऽयम् अन्यार्थे वाक्ये सामर्थ्यगम्यो ऽर्थः, न तु शब्दार्थतया शक्यः कल्पयितुम् ॥ ९.७६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

076	If the husband went abroad for some sacred duty, (she) must wait for him eight years, if (he went) to (acquire) learning or fame six (years), if (he went) for pleasure three years.
</details>
