+++
title = "112 ज्येष्ठस्य विंश"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the eldest, the additional portion shall consist of the twentieth part of the property, as also the best of all the chattels; half of that for the middlemost, and the fourth of that for the youngest.—(112)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>इयम्</u> उद्धारनियोगस्मृतिर् अतिक्रान्तकालविषया । न त्व् अद्यत्वे ऽनुष्ठेया[^२७७] नियतकालत्वात् स्मृतीनाम् इति केचित् । अनुष्ठेयत्वव्यपदेशो दीर्घसत्रवज् ज्ञानाद् अभ्युदयो यथा स्याद् इति । न हि दीर्घसत्रम् अद्यत्वे केचिद् आहरमाणा दृश्यन्ते । अधीयते तु तदुपदेशं ब्राह्मणाः । तथा च "अन्ये कृतयुगे[^२७८] धर्माः" (म्ध् १.८५) इत्य् उक्तम् । तेन देशनियमवत् कालनियमो ऽपि धर्माणां द्रष्टव्यः । न ह्य् उपदिष्टो धर्मः सर्वत्र देशे ऽनुष्ठीयते । तथा हि देशधर्मा नियतदेशव्यवस्थिता उच्यन्ते । अन्यथा सर्वानुष्ठाने न देशव्यपदेश्यता धर्माणाम् । तथा च पठति- "अयं द्विजैर् हि विद्वद्भिः" (म्ध् ९.६६) इत्यादि । तस्माद् उद्धारनियोगगोवधस्मृतय उपदिष्टा नानुष्ठेयाः । 


[^२७८]:
     M G J: kaliyuge


[^२७७]:
     M G: 'nuṣṭheye

- <u>तद् एतद्</u> अपेशलम् । न ह्य् एवंविधः कालनियमः क्वचिद् अपि श्रूयते सायंप्रातःपर्वादिनियमाद् अन्यत्र । यच् च "अन्ये कृतयुगे धर्माः" (म्ध् १.८५) इति तत् प्रथम एव व्याख्यातम् । न हीदं[^२७९] युगभेदेन धर्मव्यवस्थाहेतुः[^२८०] । देशनियमो ऽपि प्राचीनप्रवणादिव्यतिरेकेण मध्यदेशपूर्वदेशकृतो[^२८१] नैवास्तीत्य् उक्तम्, "जातिजानपदान् धर्मान्[^२८२]" (म्ध् ८.४१), "सद्भिर् आचरितम्"[^२८३] (म्ध् ८.४६) इत्य् अत्र । दीर्घसत्रेष्व् अद्यत्वे ऽप्य् अनुष्ठानसंभवः । संवत्सरशब्दस् त्व् अहःसु प्रथम एव दर्शितः । यत् तु नाद्यत्वे केचिद् अनुतिष्ठन्तो दृश्यन्त इति, उपदिष्टार्थस्य नित्यवद् आम्नातस्यापि बहुभिः प्रकारैर् अनुष्ठानसाधनाशक्त्या फलानिच्छया वा नास्तिकतया वा । यत् तु "वेने राज्यं प्रशासति" (म्ध् ९.६६) तदाप्रभृतिकं महापौर्वकालिकम् अनुष्ठानं दर्शयतीत्य् अर्थवादो ऽसौ न कालोपदेशः । 


[^२८३]:
     M G: ācaritān


[^२८२]:
     M G: nijān janapadadharmān


[^२८१]:
     M G: madhyadeśaḥ pūrva-


[^२८०]:
     M G: -hetu-


[^२७९]:
     M G: hi

- **ज्येष्ठस्य विंशः** । ज्येष्ठस्य सर्वद्रव्याद्[^२८४] विंशतितमो भाग उद्धृत्य दातव्य एव । **मध्यमस्य तदर्धं** चत्वारिंशत्तमो भागः । एवं कनिष्ठस्य **तुरीयो** ज्येष्ठापेक्षयाशीतितमो भागः । एवम् उद्धृते परिशिष्टं त्रिधा कर्तव्यम् । तत्र सर्वेभ्यो द्रव्येभ्यो **यद् वरं** श्रेष्ठं तज् ज्येष्ठस्यैव । अथ वा "द्रव्येष्व् अपि परं वरम्" इति पाठः । उत्तमाधममध्यानि यानि द्रव्यादीनि सन्ति ततस् तस्माद् यद् एकं श्रेष्ठं तत् तस्यैव तद् उक्तं भवति । यत्र गावो ऽश्वा वा सन्ति एकः श्रेष्ठो ज्येष्ठस्य दातव्यो न द्रव्यान्तरेण मूल्येन वा स्वीकर्तव्यः । त्रयाणां सर्वेषां गुणिनाम् अयम् उद्धारविधिः, गुणवताम् उद्धारदर्शनात् ॥ ९.११२ ॥


[^२८४]:
     M G: madhyadravyād vā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people hold the following view—“This rule regarding the *additional
portions* refers to the past, and is not meant to be observed during the
present time; specially because the rules laid down in the *Smṛti*
always bear upon some particular time; and when the rule is put forth as
to be observed, the intention of the author is that the knowledge of
this may bring merit to the learner; just as it is in the case of the
Prolonged Sacrificial Sessions. No one is found nowadays to perform
these Prolonged Sacrificial Sessions, and yet *Brāhmaṇa* texts contain
injunctions of them. It is in view of such acts that it has been
declared that ‘Religious duties for the Kali cycle are different *etc.,
etc*.’ (l85). Thus religious duties are to be understood as restricted
in regard to time also, just as they are in regard to place. As a matter
of fact, no religious act that has been enjoined is performed in all
places; hence it is that they are declared as restricted in regard to
place. If they were meant to be performed at all places, there would be
no such restrictions as—‘This shall be done by the learned twice-born
persons etc, *etc*.’ (9.66). From all this it follows that when rules
regarding *Additional Portions* are put forward, they are not meant to
be observed, their case being analogous to that of *Killing the cow*
(for the *Madhuparka* offering).”

This view is not quite satisfactory. No such restriction regarding
*time* is found laid down anywhere. Restrictions regarding *place* also
that are found pertain only to ‘the ground sloping towards the east’ and
so forth, and never to the ‘Central’ or ‘Eastern’ or other parts of the
country; as has been made clear under 8.41. As regards the Prolonged
Sacrificial Sessions also, it is quite possible even nowadays to preform
them; specially as it has been already shown that in connection with all
this the term ‘year’ stands for the *day*. As for no one being found to
perform these nowadays,—even though its performance has been enjoined as
*necessary*,—that may be due to the fact, either that men are not
possessed of the capacity necessary for their performance, or that they
do not desire the results obtainable from its performance, or that they
do not have sufficient faith. Then, as regards the phrase ‘while Vena
was ruling over his kingdom’ (9.66), which has the appearance of a
restriction regarding *time*, all that it indicates is that the duties
laid down have been performed from very ancient times; and not that they
are restricted in regard to time.

The ‘twentieth part’ for the eldest; *i.e*., the twentieth part of the
entire state shall be deducted and given to the eldest brother. Half of
that—*i.e*., the fortieth part, to the middlemost brother; and to the
youngest brother, the fourth part of that,—*i.e*., the eightieth part.
When all these shares have been taken out, the remainder is to be
divided into three equal parts.

Further, among all the chattels, that which happens to be the best is to
be given to the eldest brother.

Or, the reading may be ‘*dravyeṣvapi param varam*,’ which means that
from among all kinds of things—good, bad and indifferent,—the best of
each kind shall be given to the eldest brother. For instance, if there
are cows or horses, the best of these shall be given to
him—absolutely—and not either in lieu of any other article, or in return
for a price.

This rule regarding *additional portions* is meant only for those cases
where the three brothers are possessed of special qualifications; as it
is only in the case of such men that additional shares are found to be
actually given.—(112)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.114), which notes that this
unequal division pertains to eases where the Father himself is dividing
his *self-acquired* property among his sons,—no such division being
permissible regarding ancestral property.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 645), which supplies the following
explanation:—The twentieth part of the property going to be divided, as
also the *best* thing among the articles, should be given to the eldest
brother; to the second brother, the fortieth part of the estate and also
an article of the second quality; and to the youngest brother, the
eightieth part of the estate and a third-rate article; the property that
remains after this is to be divided equally;—it goes on to add that,
though this unequal division has been sanctioned by several texts, yet
it should never be adopted in practice, as it is contrary to popular
sentiment, and what is against popular sentiment should not be done.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 468), along with the next two
verses which adds the following notes.—This deduction of special shares
pertains to cases where the eldest brother is endowed with superior
qualifications;—the law on this point may be thus summed up: In a case
where there are several sons born of the same mother, and every one is
endowed with qualities,—but there is a gradual inferiority in the
qualities,—then the eldest brother should receive as his special share,
the twentieth part out of the whole property, as also the best among the
articles in the property; the second brother is to receive half of that,
*i.e*., the fortieth part, and also one article of the second quality;
and the youngest brother, the eightieth part, and also an article of the
lowest quality;—when however the eldest and the youngest alone are
possessed of superior qualities, then the said special shares are to be
given to these two only, the second brother receiving only his ordinary
share, the special share prescribed for the *qualified* second
brother—*i.e*., the fortieth pari of the property,—being equally divided
among the throe;—in a case where there are several brothers between the
oldest and the youngest, and many of them are possessed of superior
qualities, each one of the middle brothers is to receive a fortieth part
as his special share;—when the eldest brother is possessed of very
superior qualities, while the others are entirely devoid of qualities,
he shall take as his special share the best among the articles,—the best
of every kind of articles, *e.g*., ruby among the gems and so forth,—and
also one among each kind of cows, buffaloes and other cattle.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 43);—in the *Smṛtitattva* II (p.
193);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 128), which notes on p. 125
that this refers to cases where the elder brother is endowed with
special qualifications, or where he is specially desirous of having the
extra share;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*, (p. 331), which says that this refers
to the property acquired by the father when he divides it among his sons
during his own life-time;—and by *Jīmūtavāhana* (Dāyabhāga, p. 64), who
says that equal partition is to be made after all these ‘special shares’
have been extracted, as is made clear by verse 116; the special share of
the eldest brother being the twentieth part of the property along with
the ‘best article’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.112-113)**

*Gautama* (28.5-8).—‘The additional share of the eldest son consists of
the twentieth part of the estate, a male and a female (of animals with
one row of front teeth), a cart yoked with animals with two rows of
front teeth, and a bull; the additional share of the middlemost consists
of the one-eyed, old, hornless and tailless animals, if there are
several of them; the additional share of the youngest consists of the
sheep, grain, iron-utensils in the house, a house, a cart yoked with
oxen, and one of each kind of the other animals. The remaining property
shall be divided equally.’

*Baudhāyana* (2-3.4-5).—‘Or the eldest may receive the most excellent
chattel; for the Veda says “they distinguished the eldest by an
additional share of the property;” or the eldest may receive in excess,
one part out of ten; and the other sons shall receive equal shares. The
additional share of the eldest is a cow, a horse, a goat or a sheep,
respectively among the four castes.’

*Viṣṇu* (18.37).—‘A best part shall be given to the eldest as his
additional share.’

*Yājñavalkya* (12.114).—‘If the father makes the partition, he can
distribute the property among his sons as he pleases; or he shall give
the superior share to the eldest; or he may give equal shares to all.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 33).—‘If the father makes the division during his
life-time, he shall not make any difference in favour of any son; nor
shall he disinherit any without reason.’

*Nārada* (13.4).—‘Or the father himself may distribute his property
among his sons, when he is stricken in years,—either allotting a larger
share to the eldest son, or in any other way that he chooses.’

Do. (13.13).—‘To the eldest son, a larger share shall be allotted and a
lesser share than that to the youngest, the rest shall take equal
shares; and so shall an unmarried sister.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.7-10).—‘Partition among coparceners is held to be of two
kinds. One is with attention to priority of birth, the other consists of
the allotment of equal shares. All sons of the twice-born, begotten on
wives of the same caste as themselves, shall take equal shares, after
giving a preferential share to the eldest. He who is the first by birth,
by sacred knowledge, or by good qualities, shall take a couple of shares
out of the partible wealth, and the rest shall take equal shares; hut
the former stands to these latter in the relation of father, as it were.
When they divide their father’s heritage, the sons shall share alike;
but he who is distinguished by sacred knowledge and virtue shall obtain
a larger share than the rest.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 471).—‘When the property is going to be
divided, they shall make over to the eldest a hull from among the cows
and hulls, or some superior article, and the household temple; the
others shall go out of the family-house and build their own houses. If
they do not build separate houses, then the best house shall go the
eldest, the next best to the middlemost, and the next to the youngest.’

*Āpastamba* (2.14.7, 10-15).—‘In some countries, gold, black cattle, or
black produce of the earth (iron) is the share of the eldest. This
preference for the eldest son is forbidden by the scriptures; for it is
declared in the Veda, without making any differentiation among sons,
that “Manu divided his wealth amongst his sons.” The Veda also lends
support to the rule in favour of the eldest son—“They distinguish the
eldest by a larger share of the heritage.” But the answer to this is
that those versed in the science of interpreting the law declare that a
mere statement of facts cannot he a rule.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 472).—‘One should allot the tenth part of
the property as the additional share for the eldest who happens to be
well-behaved.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**ज्येष्ठस्य** विंशतिभागः **सर्वद्रव्येषु च यद् वरम्** । **मध्यमस्य** **ततो ऽर्धं** चत्वारिंशद् भागः । वरद्रव्यानन्तरश् चोद्धारो मध्यमस्य । एवं चतुर्थस् त्व् अशीतिभागो यवीयसः सर्वद्रव्येभ्यश् च हीनः उद्धारः । "द्रव्येभ्यश् च वरं वरम्" इत्य् अस्मिन् पाठे मध्यमकनिष्ठयोस् तदनुरूपैवांशकल्पना विज्ञेया । एवं च मध्यगा उद्धृत्य यद् अन्यच् छिष्यते तस्य समो विभागः कार्यः । त्रयाणां चायं समगुणानां विभागविधिः, त्रयाणाम् उद्धारदर्शनात् । अयम् अपरो विभागः ॥ ९.११२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

112	The additional share (deducted) for the eldest shall be one-twentieth (of the estate) and the best of all chattels, for the middlemost half of that, but for the youngest one-fourth.
</details>
