+++
title = "127 अपुत्रो ऽनेन"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who has no son may make his daughter an ‘appointed daughter’ in the following manner: [He shall mark the declaration]—‘The child that may bk born of her shall be the performer of my funeral rites’.—(127)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यद् अपत्यम् अस्यां** जायेत **तन् मे** मह्यं **स्वधाकरम्** । और्ध्वदेहिकस्य श्राद्धादिपुत्रकार्यलक्षणार्थः स्वधाशब्दः । न त्व् अयम् एवोच्चार्यः । तथा च गौतमः- "पितोत्सृजेत् पुत्रिकाम् अनपत्यो ऽग्निं प्रजापतिं चेष्ट्वास्मदर्थम् अपत्यम् इति संवाद्य । अभिसंधिमात्रात्[^३२४] पुत्रिकेत्य् एकेषाम्" (ग्ध् २८.१८–१९) इति मन्त्रादियोगेन[^३२५] विनापि भवति पुत्रिका । न तु[^३२६] संवादाभावेन । यद्य् अप्य् अभिसंधिः[^३२७] हृदयात्कृतम्, उच्यते[^३२८] स तु वचनेन[^३२९] यावन् न ज्ञापितस् तावज् जामाता विप्रतिपद्येत । **कुर्वीत पुत्रिकाम्** एष तस्या व्यपदेशः ॥ ९.१२७ ॥


[^३२९]:
     M G: sutavacanena; J: punarvacanena


[^३२८]:
     J: -kṛta ity ucyate


[^३२७]:
     M G: abhisaṃbandhe; J: abhisaṃbandho


[^३२६]:
     M G J: nanu


[^३२५]:
     M G: saṃvādādyabhisaṃbandhamātrādiyogena 


[^३२४]:
     J: abhisaṃbandhamātrāt
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*The child that may be born of this girl shall be the performer of my
funeral rites*.’ The term ‘*svadhā*,’ stands for the *Śrāddha* and the
other after-death rites; it is not necessary that this shall be; the
exact formula uttered. Says Gautama (28.18)—‘The father, having no son,
shall offer sacrifices to Agni and Prajāpati, and shall give away the
appointed daughter, stipulating that *the child shall be for me*.’—The
opinion of some people is that the daughter becomes *appointed* by mere
intention, (28.19); from which it is clear that the daughter becomes
‘appointed’ even without the pronouncement of any definite formula.

“In the absence of a distinct stipulation, even though the intention may
be present in the father’s mind, yet, until it has been clearly
declared, the son-in-law may not agree (to surrender the child).”

It is in view of this that the text says—‘*Shall make his daughter an
appointed daughter*.’—(127)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 475) as a clear
indication that the ‘appointment’ of the daughter is undisputed in a
case where it has been done in accordance with a clear agreement between
the father of the bride and the bridegroom;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra 38a);—in *Vyvahāra-Balambhaṭṭī* (pp, 651 and 633) and by
Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 223), to the effect that the appointed
daughter offers the Ball to her appointing father through her son.

It is quoted in the *Vidhānapārījāta* (p. 699)—in the *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 561);—in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 182), as laying down the
mode of appointing the daughter;—in the *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 414), to
the effect that it clearly implies that there should be an express
stipulation with the girl’s husband;—in *Dattakamīmāṃsā* (p. 7);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 185a), which says that the son that is born
of the Appointed Daughter after stipulation, belongs to the father of
the girl; though the opinion has been held that this is so also in cases
where there has been no open stipulation to the effect.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.127-129, 9.132-133)  
**

(See below, verse 139.)

*Gautama* (23.18).—‘A father who has no male issue may *appoint* his
daughter, offering oblations to Agni and to Prajāpati, and addressing to
the bridegroom the words—“For me be thy male offering.” Some people hold
that the daughter becomes an *Appointed Daughter* by the mere intention
of her father.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3-15).—‘The male child born of a daughter after an
agreement has been made, is to be known as *the son of an appointed
daughter*, and other male offspring to the daughter they call *the
daughter’s son*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.15-17)—‘The third is the *Appointed Daughter*;—it is
declared in the Veda—“A maiden who has no brothers comes back to the
male ancestors (of her own family); returning she becomes their son.”
With reference to this matter, there is a verse to be spoken by the
father when appointing his daughter,—“I shall give thee a brotherless
damsel decked with ornaments; the son whom she may hear shall he my
son.’”

*Viṣṇu* (15.4-5).—‘The third is the son of an Appointed Daughter. She is
called an Appointed Daughter, who is given away by her father with the
words “the son whom she bears shall be mine.” She is called an Appointed
Daughter, though she has not been given away according to the rule of an
Appointed Daughter.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.37-38).—‘Both a son’s son and the son of an Appointed
Daughter lead a man to heaven. Both are pronounced to he equal as
regards their right of inheritance and the duty of offering balls of
meal. Gautama has declared that a daughter is appointed after offering
oblations *to Agni* and Prajāpati; others have said that she is an
Appointed Daughter who was merely intended to ho one by a man having no
male issue.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 561).—‘Just as the daughter has rights
over her father’s property, even in the presence of the relatives, so is
her son also the owner of the property of his mother’s father.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 562).—‘A sonless man *appoints* his
daughter as his son,—either in his own mind, or in the presence of the
king, the fire, and his relatives;—or she may have been so appointed
even before her birth and given to her husband on that express
understanding;—or she may be so given away even after her father’s
death. Such an Appointed Daughter obtains an equal share in the property
of her father.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 559).—‘The Appointed Daughter is
like the son; her son offers Piṇḍa to his father’s father as also to his
mother’s father; there is no difference, in the world, between the
daughter’s son and the son’s son, so far as benefit is concerned.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 56, 2-128).—‘The son of the Appointed
Daughter is like the body-born son.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 562, 2-128).—‘The son of the Appointed
Daughter is equal to the son; he inherits the property of his own
father, as also that of his mother’s father, who has no son, as if he
were his own son;—he shall offer the ball of meal to his own as well as
his mother’s father. Whether appointed or not appointed, whichever son
the daughter gives birth to, by that son, does her father also become
*endowed with son*; and he may offer the hall to him and inherit his
property.

(Devala also reproduces Manu 133.)

*Mahābhārata* (13.45-13).—(Same as Manu 132, second-half.)
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथैवौरसाभावे क्षेत्रजाद्यभिधानं दायविभागप्रकरणे ऽंशप्राप्त्यर्थं तथैव पुत्रिकापुत्रविधानं विज्ञेयम् । अपुत्रस्यैवैतत् स्यात् पुत्रिकापुत्रविधानम् । अनया संविदा "यद् अपत्यं भवेद् अस्यां तन् मम स्यात् स्वधाकरम्" पिण्डोदकप्रदम् इत्य् अर्थः । अस्यार्थवादः परकृतिरूप उदाह्रियते ॥ ९.१२७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

127	He who has no son may make his daughter in the following manner an appointed daughter (putrika, saying to her husband), 'The (male) child, born of her, shall perform my funeral rites.'
</details>
