+++
title = "136 अकृता वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Either appointed on not appointed, if a daughter bears a son to a husband of equal status, through that son does the maternal grandfather become endowed with a ‘son’s son’; he shall offer the funeral cake and inherit his property.—(136)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अधस्तनोपरितनवाक्यपर्यालोचनया पुत्रिकापुत्रविषय एवायम् अतिशयोक्त्या प्रतीयते । **अकृताया** अपि दुहितुः पुत्रो मातामहधनभाग् इत्य् उक्तम्, किं पुनः **कृताया,** इत्य् एवम् अन्यशेषत्वात् पुत्रिकाया विधिष्व् आनर्थक्यप्रसङ्गान् न दौहित्रस्य रिक्थप्राप्त्यर्थः । 

- <u>ननु</u> च स्मृत्यन्तरे दौहित्रमात्रस्य पिण्डदानाधिकारः[^३८५] श्रूयते- "मातामहानाम् अप्य् एवम्" (य्ध् १.२२६) इति । इहापि प्रकरणं[^३८६] हित्वा श्रुतिवाक्यसामर्थ्येन दौहित्रमात्रविषयतैव प्रतिपत्तुं न्याय्या- **दद्यात् पिण्डं हरेद् धनम्** इति । तथापरम् उक्तम्- "दौहित्रो ह्य् अखिलं रिक्थम्" (म्ध् ९.१३२) इत्यादि । 


[^३८६]:
     M G: karaṇaṃ


[^३८५]:
     M G omit: piṇḍa-

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । यद् उक्तं "मातामहानाम्" (य्ध् १.२२६) इति, तद् बहुवचनं किं व्यक्त्यपेक्ष्यम् उत लक्षणया प्रमातामाहाद्यभिप्रायेण । व्यक्तिपक्ष एकस्यैव मातामहस्य पिण्डदानं प्राप्नोति श्राद्धादिवत् । तच् च सपिण्डीकरणे कृते विरुद्धम् । एवं ह्य् आहुः "अत ऊर्ध्वं त्रिभ्यो दद्यात्" इति । अथापि पितुर् अन्यस्य सपिण्डीकरणम् एव न करिष्यत इत्य् उच्यते । तद् अपि न[^३८७] निषेधाभावात् । लक्षणायाः[^३८८] संनिकर्षो विशेषाभावाल् लक्षणविशेषापरिज्ञाने[^३८९] ऽनवगत्वम् एव स्मृत्यादिबलेन च प्रकरणत्यागस्येति[^३९०] विरोधप्रसङ्गस् तद्विशेषो[^३९१] हि पदार्थः[^३९२] प्रकरणाद् उत्कृष्यते, द्वादशोपसदो ऽहीनस्येतिवत् (च्ड़्। प्म्स् ३.३.१५–१६) । **अकृता वा** इत्य् अस्य चान्यपरत्वम् उक्तम् । तस्मात् पौत्रिकेयविषयम् एतत् ॥ ९.१३६ ॥


[^३९२]:
     M G: padārtha-


[^३९१]:
     M G J: taṃ niveśo


[^३९०]:
     M G: kāraṇatyāgasyeti


[^३८९]:
     J: -viśeṣaparijñāne


[^३८८]:
     M G: lakṣaṇayoḥ


[^३८७]:
     M G omit: na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

By duly considering what has gone before and what follows next, it is
clear that the present verse also refers to the Appointed Daughter.

It has been said that the son of the *unappointed* daughter also is
entitled to the property of his maternal grandfather; how much more so
is the son of the Appointed Daughter entitled to it?—This is the idea
meant to be expressed. The verse cannot he taken as laying down the
title of the grandson to the property of the maternal grandfather; for
if such a general principle were recognised, then there would be no need
for the institution of the ‘appointed daughter’ at all.

“But in another Smṛti text it is found to be laid down that it is
incumbent upon every daughter’s son to offer the cake to his maternal
grandfather:—‘so also on behalf of the mother’s fathers’ (*Yājañvalkya*,
1.228). And in the present verse also, if we ignore the fact of its
occurring in a context dealing with the ‘appointed daughter,’ and bear
in mind the words of the text itself, it appeal’s only reasonable to
take, as pertaining to every daughter’s son, the injunction regarding
‘the offering of cakes and the inheriting of property. In another text
also, it has been declared that ‘the *daughter’s son* shall take the
entire property etc., etc.’ (*Manu*, 9.132).”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In the text quoted from
Yājñavalkya, we find the term ‘mother’s *fathers*’

in the plural; now does this refer directly to the individual ‘father,’
or indirectly to the ‘mother’s *grandfather*’ and other ancestors? In
the former case, it would mean that the offering is to be made to the
*maternal grandfather* only, just like the ordinary ‘*Śrāddha*’ and
other offerings; and this would be wrong, after the ‘*Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*’
has been done (which has unified the mother’s father with her
grandfather and great-grandfather); since it has been declared that
‘after the Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa one shall offer cakes to all the three.’ If it
be held that the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa* rite itself may not be performed. But
this also could not be; as the performance of it is nowhere forbidden.
As for ‘indirect’ indication, it can be justified only under very
special circumstances; and then too it must be in consonance with the
direct declaration of *Śruti texts*. And it is only in very special
circumstances that a text ean be entirely separated from the context in
which it occurs; as is found to be the case in regard to the ‘Twelve
Upasads.’ (*Mīmāṃsā* Sūtra. 3.3.15-16).

As for the epithet ‘*not appointed*,’ it has been already explained that
it means something quite different.

For all these reasons, the verse must be taken as referring to *the son
of the Appointed Daughter* only.—(136)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘(*a*) *Akṛtā vā* (*b*) *kṛtā*.’—(*a*) ‘Daughter *not appointed*
explicitly, and (*b*) one appointed explicitly’ (Kullūka);—(*b*)
‘unappointed, *i.e*., any ordinary daughter’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa
Nandana);—the ‘unappointed daughter’ is added only hyperbolically, the
meaning being that ‘when even the unappointed daughter is entitled to
inherit, the appointed one is all the more entitled’ (Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.136), to the effect that in the
absence of the son and the daughter, the property goes to the daughter’s
son. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that Vijñāneśvara had taken the verse as
applying *to all* daughters, but Medhātīthi has come to the conclusion
that the rule is meant for the ‘Appointed Daughter’ only.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 435), to the effect that the ‘daughter’s
son’ who inherits his grand-father’s property must offer *Śrāddhas* to
him;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 40b);—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
p. 190a and 205b), which explains that the Appointed Daughter being a
‘son’, her son, even though the ‘son of a daughter’ (*dauhitra*) is
virtually the ‘son’s son’ (*pautra*); and hence just as the son’s son
inherits the property op the failure of the son, so does the daughter’s
son also, on the failure of the daughter;—and by Jîmūtavāhana
(*Dāyabhāga*. p. 224).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (28.9).—‘Some people declare that a daughter becomes an
Appointed Daughter merely by the intention of her father.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 435).—‘The son of the Appointed Daughter should
always offer the Shraddha to his mother’s father.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.)—‘If one has no son, his Śrāddha should he performed by
his daughter’s son.’

*Skanda* (Do.)—‘If one inherits the property of the father and other
ancestors of his mother, he must perform their Śrāddha in due form.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.37).—‘Both a son’s son and the son of an Appointed
Daughter lead a man to heaven; both are pronounced to be equal as
regards their right of inheritance and the duty of offering balls of
meal.’

*Smṛti* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 586).—‘The son’s sou and the son of the
Appointed Daughter both lead one to supreme Bliss; and both are
considered equal in the matter of offering the Ball of meal and water,
and also in regard to inheritance.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धनग्रहणस्य पिण्ड]दाननिमित्तत्वात् नियमतो धनहरणं पिण्डदानं च । अकृतायां तु पुत्रिकायां दौहित्रस्येच्छासंनियोगशिष्यं पिण्डदानं धनहरणं च स्यात् । यद्य् अभ्युप[गम्यते विक]ल्पो नियमो वा भवत् । ततः पुत्रिकाविधिनार्थः स्यात् । तस्मात् कृतायां नियमः, अन्यत्र तु विकल्प इत्य् उक्तम् । यद् आह । ९.१३६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

136	Through that son whom (a daughter), either not appointed or appointed, may bear to (a husband) of equal (caste), his maternal grandfather (has) a son's son; he shall present the funeral cake and take the estate.
</details>
