+++
title = "143 अनियुक्तासुतश् चैव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The offspring of a wife not ‘authorised,’ and the offspring obtained from her younger brother-in-law by a woman who has already got a son,—both of these are undeserving of a share; one being born of an adulterer, and the other being the product of lust.—(143)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अपुत्रे भर्तरि मृते पुत्रोत्पादने स्त्रिया गुरुनियोगो ऽपेक्षितव्य इत्य् उक्तम् । तस्यैवायम् अनुवादः । 

- या गुरुभिर् **अनियुक्ता** पुत्रार्थिनी पुत्रम् उत्पादयेत् — "क्षेत्रं किलाहं भर्तुः, क्षेत्रजश् च पुत्रस् तदर्थहरः" इत्य् अनया भ्रान्त्या — स तस्यां समुत्पन्नो न रिक्थहरः । यतः[^४०२] क्षेत्रजादिविशिष्टेन विधिनोत्पन्नस्य शास्त्रे क्षेत्रजव्यपदेशात् । तेनैव[^४०३] चास्य क्षेत्रजस्य रिक्थहरत्वम् अत्र वार्यते । पिण्डदानं तु न निषिध्यते, यद्य् अपि पतितोत्पन्नो भवति । नारदस् तु विशेषं स्मरति ।


[^४०३]:
     M G: naiva


[^४०२]:
     M G: yady api

- जाता ये त्व् अनियुक्तायाम् एकेन बहुभिस् तथा ।

- अरिक्थभाजस् ते सर्वे बीजिनाम् एव ते सुताः ॥

- दद्युस् ते बीजिने पिण्डं माता चेच् छुल्कतो हृता ।

- अशुल्कोपनतायां तु पिण्डदा वोढुर् एव ते ॥ इति । (न्स्म् १३.१८–१९)

- सुतवचनात् कृत्रिमादिवद् उत्पत्तिविध्यभावात् पुत्रमध्ये चापरिगणितत्वात् त्रैवर्णिकानां च बीजजाः प्रजीवनमात्रभागा, न रिक्थहराः । यतो ऽविशेषेण सर्वपुत्राणां भर्तरि प्रेते स्मर्यते । ऊर्ध्वम् अपि पितुः पुत्रोपकर्तव्यशिष्टस्य धनस्य विभाज्यत्वाल् लभेरन्न् एव प्रजीवनम् । एवम् एवौरसादिपुत्रस्य सपिण्डबीजकाः प्रजीवनमात्रभागाः कर्तव्याः । रिक्थहरत्वं तु नास्ति, परिगणितपुत्रविशेषोद्देशेन रिक्थहरत्वस्य श्रवणात्[^४०४] । उक्तं चैतत्, उक्तानां "यद्य् एकरिक्थिनौ स्याताम्" (म्ध् ९.१६२) इति । 


[^४०४]:
     M G: -deśenāśravaṇāt; DK (1: 1395): -deśena śravaṇāt

- अत्रानेन च दर्शनेनानियुक्तासूतादय[^४०५] इतरत्रानंशत्वाद् बीजिनो रिक्थं लभेरन्न् इति । रिक्थं प्रजीवनपर्याप्तम् एतद् विज्ञेयम् । उक्तत्वाद् अस्या भागार्थ एव दासीव भण्यते । या "सप्तैता दासयोनयः" (म्ध् ८.४१५) इति निरूपिता यासां प्रयोगार्थम् अवगन्तव्यं क्रियते । तस्यां जातो[^४०६] न दासः, सुतव्यपदेशाभावः, शूद्रस्यापि तज्जा ब्राह्मणादिवत् प्रजीवनभाजः ।


[^४०६]:
     M G: jātā


[^४०५]:
     M G: atrānena caturdaśenā-

- <u>अन्यस्</u> त्व् आह । नियतकर्मकरा अपि दासा भवन्ति । यथा स्नापकः प्रसाधकः पाचकः पावक[^४०७] इति । एवं कामतो ऽप्य् अवरुद्धा भक्ताच्छादनेन पोष्यमाणा दास्यो[^४०८] भवन्ति । एवं **पुत्रिण्या**विद्यमाने पुत्रे **आप्तो देवरान्** नियुक्तयापि । कथं पुनः पुत्रवत्या नियोगः[^४०९] । देवर एव कामार्थं नियुक्तः पुत्रोत्पादनव्यपदेशेनेत्य् अभिप्रायः । 


[^४०९]:
     M G: putravatyābhiyogaḥ


[^४०८]:
     M G: dāsye


[^४०७]:
     J omit: pāvaka

- जारजातकत्वम् उभयोः, कामजत्वं तु पुत्रवत्यां जातस्य । आद्यार्थायां पुत्रार्थैव प्रवृत्तिर् न कामतो लोभेन[^४१०] ॥ ९.१४३ ॥


[^४१०]:
     M G: kāmato yena; DK: kāmalobhena
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared above that, when the husband dies without male
issue, the wife should obtain the sanction of her elders for the
begetting of a son. And this same declaration is reiterated here.

If a woman is ‘*not authorised*’ by her elders, and yet being anxious
for a son, begets one,—under the impression that she being the ‘soil’ of
her husband, the son born of her would be his ‘*Kṣetraja*’ son and thus
entitled to inherit his property,—a son born in this manner shall not
inherit his father’s property; because a son is called ‘*Kṣetraja*’ only
when he is born in the manner expressly laid down in the scriptures; and
it. is only then that he inherits the property of the ‘owner of the
soil’ (his dead father). It is for this reason that the present verse
denies the *inheriting capacity* of the son born of the woman not duly
‘authorised;’ but it does not forbid the offering of the funeral cake;
even though the son is one born of an ‘outcast’ woman.

Narada (13.19 *et. seq*) lays down a special rule—‘Those that are born
from an unauthorised woman, either by one or by several men, are not
entitled to the property of their father; being, as they are, the sons
of the persons from whose seed they have been born;—they shall offer the
cake to the person from whose seed they are born, specially if the
mother has been obtained by 1 he payment of the nuptial foe; if however
the mother has not been obtained by the payment of the fee, they shall
offer the cake to the person who had wedded their mother,’

The text uses the term ‘*suta*,’ ‘*offspring*’ (instead of ‘*putra*’
son), because the child referred to is not born in accordance with the
law relating to the ‘adopted’ and other sons, and is, on that account,
not mentioned among ‘sons.’ Among the twice-born people the issues of
one’s mere ‘seed’ (and not of lawful wedlock) are entitled to mere
subsistence, and not to the inheritance of property; specially as in
connection with all kinds of sons it has been declared that ‘on the
death of their father the sons shall divide among themselves the
property of their father, left over after the performance of the
necessary religious rites; and they are all entitled to maintenance,’
Thus it is the duty of the Legitimate son to provide for the maintenance
of the unlawfully-begotten sons; but these latter are not entitled to
any inheritance in the property; specially because inheritance has been
declared to belong to those particular kinds of sons that have been
specially enumerated: We read (in 9.102) of ‘the *two* heirs’ (whore
only *two* sons are spoken of as ‘heirs’).

From what is said here it follows that ‘the issue of the unauthorised
woman,’ not entitled to the property of his lawful father, does become a
sharer in that of the person from whose seed he is born; and the share
in this case would be just enough for his subsistence.

Then again, as the woman has been obtained at a price, she is a ‘slave,’
and the son ‘slave-born;’ and as such, he is entitled not to a share in
the property, but to mere subsistence.

Others have held that, even though the woman may not be a regular
‘slave’ (in the technical sense), she is a servant all the same, since
the servant is always employed for doing a definite work; *e.g*., the
bath-man, the toilet-man, the cook and so forth; the woman kept for
pleasure also is employed for a definite work,—and is fed and clothed;
and hence she is as good as a servant.

Similarly also in the case of the woman who has already got a son, if
the son is alive, and yet she obtains a son from her younger
brother-in-law, even on ‘authorisation.’

“But how can there be ‘authorisation’ in the ease of a woman who has
already got a son?”

It is the brother-in-law who may be ‘authorised’ for the purposes of
pleasure, under the pretext of begetting a son.

As a matter of fact, both of these are ‘born of an adulterer;’ the one
born of a woman who has already got a son is, in addition, also ‘the
product of lust.’ In the case of the former the action is prompted
entirely by a longing for a son, and not by lust.—(143)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 368);—and in
*Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 586), which adds the following
notes—‘*Aniyuktāsutaḥ*’ is the son begotten by the widow without the
permission of her elders;—‘*bhāgam*’ share in the property of the
husband of the widow;—this means that such a son is precluded from the
offering of *Piṇḍas* and other rites also. This refers to cases where
the widow has been bought over to the connection.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.143-144)  
**

*Gautama* (28.23).—‘A son begotten by another relation on a widow whose
husband’s brother is alive,—is excluded from inheritance.’

*Nārada* (13.19-20; Vivādaratnākara, p. 387).—‘Sons begotten on a widow
not authorised, by one or many persons, are not entitled to
inherit,—they being the sons of
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अनियुक्तासुतश् चैवे**[ति देवराज् जातो] ज्येष्ठभार्यायाम् इत्य् अर्थः । एवं च सति नियुक्तासुतस्य तत्र समांशत्वम् उक्तं विज्ञेयम् । **पुत्रिण्य् आप्तश् च देवराद्** इत्य् एतद् अनपत्याय्[आ एव देवरोत्पन्नस्य नान्योत्पन्नस्य भागहर]त्वम् । देवराद् अपि किम्, उतान्यस्माद् इत्य् "अपि"शब्दलोपः सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञेयः । **देवर**ग्रहणं चोभयविशेषः । अस्यार्थवादः यस्मात् तौ **जारजात**[**ककामजौ** इति] कथंचिन् निन्देयम् उभयोः, येन तन्निन्दावचनम् उभयत्र युज्यते, अविधिनोत्पन्नत्वाद् उभयोः ॥ ९.१४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

143	The son of a wife, not appointed (to have issue by another), and he whom (an appointed female, already) the mother of a son, bears to her brother-in-law, are both unworthy of a share, (one being) the son of an adulterer and (the other) produced through (mere) lust.
</details>
