+++
title = "149 ब्राह्मणस्याऽनुपूर्व्येण चतस्रस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If to a Brāhmaṇa there be four wives in due order,—for partition among the sons born of these, the rule has been declared to be as follows.—(149)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अनुपूर्व**ग्रहणं तृतीये दर्शितस्य क्रमस्यानुवादः । अयम् अपि वक्ष्यमाणसंक्षेपप्रतिज्ञानार्थः ॥ ९.१४९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Order*;’—this refers to what has been said in Discourse III.

This verse also is a brief indication of what follows.—(149)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 527); and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 35b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.149-157)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.47-50).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa has issue by wives belonging to
the Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya castes respectively,—the son of the
Brāhmaṇa. wife shall receive three shares; the sou of the Kṣatriya wife,
two shares;—the other sous shall inherit equal shares.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.47.4?, 56).—‘Something very good, a bull, a vehicle
that may he the most important,—this shall be taken as a special share
by the son of the Brāhmaṇa mother.’ (57 is the same as Manu 157).

*Viṣṇu* (8.(?)1-37).—‘If there are four sons of a Brāhmaṇa from wives of
the four castes, they shall divide the entire estate of the father into
ten parts; of these the son of the Brāhmaṇa wife shall take four parts;
the son of the Kṣatriya wife, three parts; the son of the Vaiśya wife,
two parts; the son of the Śūdra wife, a single part. Again, if there are
three sons of a Brāhmaṇa by wives of the first three castes only, they
shall divide the estate into nine parts; of these each shall take, in
the order of his caste, shares amounting to four, three and two parts
respectively. If there are three sons from the Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and
Śūdra wives, they shall divide the estate into equal parts; and take
four, three and one parts respectively. If there are three sons of the
Brāhmaṇa, Vaiśya and Śūdra wives, they shall divide the estate into
seven parts and take four, two, and one parts respctively. If there are
three sons of the Kṣatriya, Vaiśya and Shudra wives, they shall divide
the estate into six parts and take three, two and one parts
respectively. If a Kṣatriya has sons by a Kṣatriya, a Vaiśya and a Śūdra
wife, the mode of division shall be the same (*i.e*., the estate being
divided into six parts etc.). If the Brahmaṇa has two sons, one
belonging to the Brāhmaṇa and another belonging to the Kṣatriya caste,
they shall divide the estate into seven parts; and the Brāhmaṇa shall
take four parts, and the Kṣatriya, three. If there are two sons to a
Brāhmaṇa, one belonging to the Brāhmaṇa and another to the Vaiśya caste,
the estate shall be divided into six parts, the Brāhmaṇa shall take
four, and the Vaiśya, two parts. If there are two sons to a Brāhmaṇa,
one belonging to the Brāhmaṇa and another to the Śūdra caste, the estate
shall be divided into live parts; and the Brahmaṇa shall take four parts
and the Śūdra a single part. If there are two sons to a Brāhmaṇa, or to
a Kṣatriya,—one belonging to the Kṣatriya and another to the Vaiśya
caste,—they shall divide the estate into five parts; the Kṣatriya shall
take three parts and the Vaiśya two parts. If there are two sons to a
Brāhmaṇa, or to a Kṣaṭtriya, one belonging to the Kṣatriya and the other
to the Śūdra caste, they shall divide the estate into four parts; and
the Kṣatriya shall take three parts and the Śūdra, a single part. If
there are two sons to a Brāhmaṇa, or to a Vaiśya or to a Śūdra,—and the
one belongs to the Vaiśya and the other to the Śūdra caste, they shall
divide the estate into three parts,—the Vaiśya taking two parts, and the
Śūdra, one. If a Brāhmaṇa has an only son, he shall take the whole
estate, provided he be a Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya or Vaiśya. If the Kṣatriya
has an only son, who is either a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya, the rule shall be
the same. If the Vaiśya has an only son who is a Vaiśya, the rule shall
be the same. The only son of a Śūdra shall be the sole heir to his Śūdra
father. A Śūdra who is the only son of a father of one of the twice-born
castes, shall inherit one half of his property;—the other shall devolve
in the same way as the property of one who dies without issue. Mothers
shall receive shares proportionate to their son’s shares;—and so shall
unmarried daughters. Sons of the same caste as their father shall
receive equal shares;—a best part shall be given to the eldest son as
bis additional share.’

*Gautama* (28.35-40).—‘The son of a Brāhmaṇa by a Kṣatriya wife, being
the eldest and endowed with good qualities, shares equally with a
younger brother born of a Brāhmaṇa mother;—but he shall not receive the
additional share due to the eldest son. If there are sons begotten by a
Brāhmaṇa on wives-of the Kṣatriya and Vaiśya castes, the division
between them shall he in the same way as between the son of a Brāhmaṇa
wife and that of a Kṣatriya wife. Similarly the two sons of a Kṣatriya
born, one from the Kṣatriya and the other from the Vaiśya wife. The son
of even a Śūdra wife,—if he is obedient like a pupil,—receives a
provision for maintenance out of the estate of a Brāhmaṇa deceased
without other male issue. According to some, the son of a woman of even
equal caste does not inherit if he behaves unrighteously.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.125)—‘The sons of the Brāhmaṇa, belonging to the four
castes, shall receive, respectively, four, three, two and one parts of
his estate; the three sons of the Kṣatriya, belonging to the Kṣatriya,
Vaiśya and Śūdra castes, shall receive three, two and one parts;—the two
sons of the Vaiśya, belonging to the Vaiśya and Śūdra castes, shall
receive two and one parts.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 536).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa has no child
except a son born from a Śūdra wife, this son, if obedient, shall
receive a maintenance and the rest of his property shall go to his
Sapiṇḍas.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 732).—That property of the Brāhmaṇa which has
been derived from gifts shall not be inherited by his sons by the
Kṣatriya and other wives; even though the father may have given this to
these latter, the son of the Brāhmaṇa wife shall take it away on his
death.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 533).—‘The son of a Brāhmaṇa born from a
Kṣatriya wife,—if he happen to be the eldest and possessed of good
qualities,—may obtain the same share as the Brāhmaṇa sons; similarly
with the Vaiśya son of a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 528).—‘Among the sons of the lower castes,
horn of married wives, the shares go on decreasing by one.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 531).—‘Among sons born from wives of other
castes, there is a decrease in the inheritance by one half in each
case.’

Do. (p. 536).—‘The son of the Śūdra wife is entitled to inherit
property; whatever his father gives him, that shall be his share.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do., p. 532).—‘Between two sons, one born of the wife of
the same caste as the father, the other of a wife of the next lower
caste,—if the latter happens to be possessed of good qualities, he may
obtain the special share of the eldest; or he may even become the master
of the entire property.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**आनुपूर्व्य**ग्रहणम् [अनुवादार्थ]म् । **यदि**ग्रहणं चानित्यार्थम् । तथा चोक्तम् "कामतस् तु प्रवृत्तानाम् इमाः स्युः क्रमशो ऽवराः" इति ॥ ९.१४९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

149	If there be four wives of a Brahmana in the direct order of the castes, the rule for the division (of the estate) among the sons born of them is as follows:
</details>
