+++
title = "166 स्वक्षेत्रे संस्कृतायाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Him whom a man himself begets in his own sanctified ‘soil,’—one shall know as the ‘body-born’ (legitimate) son, (declared) to be the first in order.—(166)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^४७७]:
     M G DK (1: 1303): -kalpitam

आत्मीयवचनः **स्व**शब्दो न समानजातीयताम् आह । एतेन स्वयं **संस्कृतायां** जात **औरस** इतरथासंस्कृतायां[^४७८] निवृत्तिपरः संस्कृतशब्दः संभाव्यते । ततश् चान्येन संस्कृतायाम् अप्य्[^४७९] औरसः स्यात् । उक्तार्थे च **स्व**शब्दे क्षत्रियादिपुत्रा अप्य् औरसा भवन्ति । न हि तेषाम् अन्यत् पुत्रलक्षणम् अस्ति । 


[^४७९]:
     M G J: anya


[^४७८]:
     DK: -kṛtāyā

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु **प्राथमकल्पिकम्** औरसविशेषणं मन्वानाः[^४८०] क्षत्रियापुत्रान् औरसान् असंपूर्णलक्षणान्[^४८१] मन्यन्ते । 


[^४८१]:
     M G: saṃpūrṇa-


[^४८०]:
     M G: caturaḥ

- <u>एवं</u> तु व्याख्याने यथा **स्वक्षेत्रे संस्कृतायाम्** असंपूर्णलक्षण औरसस् तच् च स्वे ऽसंस्कृतायां प्राप्नोति, किं पुनः क्षत्रियादीनाम् औरसत्वेन, पुत्रास् तावद् भवन्ति परिमितांशभाजश् च । 

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । असत्य् औरसक्षेत्रजादिलक्षणे द्वादशसंख्यानियमात् कथं पुत्रत्वम् इति ।

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । किम् उ लक्षणेन, लोकतो व्यवहारप्रसिद्धेः । तथा हि यो यतो जातः स तस्य पुत्र इति लौकिका व्यवहरन्ति । तथा चाजनके[^४८२] कश्चित् पितृव्यवहारं कुर्वन्न् अन्येनेति बोध्यते "नैष ते पिता न हि त्वम् अनेन जातः" इति । अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां जनकः पिता जन्यश् च पुत्र इत्य् एतद् अवगम्यते । 


[^४८२]:
     M G: ca janake

- विशेषव्यपदेशार्थस् तु लक्षणारम्भः । यत्[^४८३] तु क्षेत्रजादिजनके वा पुत्रत्वम् इति, तत्कार्यनिबन्धनम् अपुत्रस्यापि कार्यविधानात् पुत्रत्वम्, पुत्रत्वस्य तन्निषेधान् न जतत्वम्[^४८४] इति । तथा चैते प्रतिनिधय उच्यन्ते तैः । अत्रायं जन्मनिबन्धे हि पुत्रत्वे औरसपुनर्भवनियुक्तासुतानां विशेषो न स्यात्, जन्मनस् तुल्यत्वात् । किं च पुत्रकार्यकारणान् नैव कश्चिद् अपुत्रः स्यात् । यस् तु लौकिको व्यवहारः असौ जनके ऽपि पितृव्यवहारदर्शनाद् व्यभिचारी । 


[^४८४]:
     DK: tanniṣedhārthaṃ jātatvam


[^४८३]:
     M G: ye

- तेन, सत्य् अपि प्रयोगे, इन्द्रादिशब्दवल् लोकतो ऽर्थातिशयाच् छास्त्रे चोत्पत्तिविधानाद् भार्यादिव्यवहारवत् पुत्रव्यवहारो ऽवगन्तव्यः । 

- तत्र च यद् औरसस्य प्राथमकल्पिकत्ववचनं तत्र व्यवहारो ऽवगन्तव्यः । न व्यवहारे, किं तर्ह्य् उपकारे[^४८५] ऽपि, पितुर् उपकारेण दृष्टं[^४८६] यथौरसो भूयांसं शक्नोत्य् उपकर्तुम्[^४८७] इति **प्राथमकल्पिकम्** इति[^४८८] ज्ञापयति । उपकारापचयाभिप्रायाच् च प्रतिनिधिव्यवहारः[^४८९] । न ह्य् एषां प्रतिनिधिता संभवति, प्रारब्धस्य कर्मणो ऽङ्गोपचारप्रतिनिधेः[^४९०] । न च पुत्रः कर्माङ्गम्,[^४९१] अपत्योत्पादनकर्मणो गुणकर्मत्वात्[^४९२] । तेन सत्य् एव क्षेत्रजादीनां पुत्रत्वे[^४९३] प्रतिनिधित्ववचनम् औरसत्वप्रशंसार्थम् । यथा "अपशवो वान्ये गोऽश्वेभ्यः पशवो गोऽश्वाः" इति पशूनाम् अपशुत्ववचनं गवाश्वानां प्रशंसितुम् । 


[^४९३]:
     M G: eva kṣetraje


[^४९२]:
     DK: -karmaṇo 'guṇa-


[^४९१]:
     M G: putrakarmāgamo; DK: putrakarmāṅgam


[^४९०]:
     DK: 'ṅgāpacāre pratinidhir


[^४८९]:
     M G: upakārāpacayo hi prāyaścittapratinidhivyavahāraḥ


[^४८८]:
     M G omit: prāthamakalpikam iti; DK: upakartuṃ na tathetare iti


[^४८७]:
     M G: apakartum


[^४८६]:
     M G: dṛṣṭo


[^४८५]:
     M G: apakāre

- यदा च यो यदीयाद् बीजाज् जातः स तस्य पुत्र इति, तथा च दर्शितं महाभारते । द्वैपायनाज् जाताः पाण्डुधृतराष्ट्रविदुरादयो नैते व्यास्यपुत्रा इति व्यपदिश्यन्ते । यथा च सप्रयोजनं[^४९४] क्षत्रियादिपुत्राणाम् औरसत्वं तथोपपादितम् । पुत्रिकापुत्रस्य पुत्रत्वे[^४९५] द्वादशसंख्यातिरेक आप्नोति । 


[^४९५]:
     M G: atha kṣatriyāputrikāputratve; DK: atha kṣetrajādiṣu putrikāputreṇa


[^४९४]:
     M G: atha svayaṃ prayojanaṃ

- भवतु को दोषः । त्रयोदशो ऽयं पुत्रो ऽस्तु । औरसेन तुल्यफलत्वात् तद्गहणम्,[^४९६] तत्साम्याच् च । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम्- "तत्समः पुत्रिकासुतः" (य्ध् २.१३२) इति ॥ ९.१६६ ॥


[^४९६]:
     M D add: atas; DK add: iti
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*own*’ here denotes *ownership*, and not *the character of
belonging to the same caste*. Thus, the meaning is that the ‘body-born’
son is one born from the woman ‘*sanctified*’ (married) by the man
himself. If this were not meant by ‘own,’ then the epithet
‘*sanctified*’ would only exclude the *unmarried* woman; so that the son
begotten on a woman *married* by another person would also come to be
known as one’s ‘body-born’ son. And further, if the word is interpreted
as we have pointed out, the sons of the *Kṣatriya* wife also would be
‘body-born’ (for the Brāhmaṇa father); these latter do not fall within
any other class of sons.’ Others take the epithet ‘*prathamakalpitam*’
as qualifying ‘body-born’ \[and meaning ‘of the principal kind’\], and
hold that the sons born of the *Kṣatriya* wife are not ‘body-born’ in
the fuller sense.

Under this explanation, however, as the son begotten on one’s own
*married* wife would not be ‘body-born’ in the full sense, he would be
as good as born of an *unmarried* wife And even if the sons of the
*Kṣatriya* and other wives are not called ‘body-born,’ what does it
matter? They still remain the man’s ‘sons’ and entitled to inherit their
limited shares in his property.

The following argument might be put forward—“If the son in question does
not fulfill the conditions of the ‘body-born,’ the ‘soil-born,’ or any
of the twelve kinds of sons,—and there are only these *twelve* kinds of
sons,—how can he be regarded as a ‘son’ at all?”

The answer to this is as follows:—What is the use of any definitions?
The application of the same depends upon actual usage. As a rule, when a
child is born of a man, he is called his ‘son’; and obviously, if the
child is not born of a man, they do not regard that man to be his
‘father’; and they tell him—‘this is not your father, you are not born
of him.’ From these two affirmative and negative propositions, it
follows that the progenitor is the ‘father’ and the person born is the
‘son;’ and it is only for the purpose of indicating the peculiar
characteristics that definitions are set forth. In the case of the
‘soil-born’ son, it is true that the person called his ‘father’ is not
his progenitor; but that is only with a view to a special purpose; the
child being called the man’s ‘son,’ for, even though not his ‘son,’ he
fulfills for him the functions of a son.

As a matter of fact, the mere fact of a person being born of a man does
not make him his ‘son’; as this has been expressly denied. It is for
this reason that such sons have been called ‘substitutes’ (in 180).
Further, if the mere fact of being born of a man were to make one his
‘son,’ then there would be no difference in the ‘sonship’ of the
‘body-born son,’ ‘the son born of a remarried woman’ and ‘the son of an
unauthorized woman,’ since the fact of being born is common to all of
them. Then again, if the mere fact of *serving the purposes of a son*
were the sole condition of one being a ‘son,’ then no one in the world
would be ‘sonless.’ As regards the common usage (regarding the use of
the name ‘son’) mentioned above, it cannot he regarded as universally
true, since it is found that in many cases the name ‘father’ is not
applied to the actual *progenitor*.

Thus then, notwithstanding ordinary usage, the actual application of the
name ‘son’—as in the case of such titles as ‘wife’ and the like—should
be determined by the scriptural texts, which lay down the various ways
in which a ‘son’ may he begotten; and it is only the signification of
the names that may be learnt from ordinary usage; just as in the ease of
such titles as ‘Indra’ and the like.

“But as regards the declaration that the ‘body-born’ son is ‘*the first
in order*,’ it is ordinary usage on which this is based.”

Not only on ordinary usage, but also upon the nature of the benefits
(conferred by this particular kind of son);—the meaning of the
declaration being that ‘the body-born son is in a position to confer the
greatest benefits upon his fathers.’ Thus, the other sons are called
‘substitutes’ only on the ground of the lessening degrees of benefits
conferred by them. As a matter of fact, however, these other sons cannot
be ‘substitutes’ in the real sense of the term; because, it is only when
a substance is used as a subsidiary accessory in the completing of an
act already begun with a certain substance (which is no longer
found)—that the former substance comes to be called a ‘substitute;’ in
the case in question however, the son is not the ‘subsidiary accessory’
of any act, the act of begetting the son being itself only a subsidiary
act Hence, what is meant by calling the other sons, ‘substitutes’ is
that though the ‘soil-born’ and others are also ‘sons,’ it is the
‘body-born’ one that is most praiseworthy; just as we find in the Vedic
passage—‘The cow and the horse are the only cattle, animals other than
the cow and the horse are not *cattle*,’—where the assertion that the
other animals are not ‘cattle’ means that the cow and the ‘horse are
praiseworthy.

Further, it has been shown in the *Mahābhārata* that sons do not always
belong to the person from whose seed they are born: *e.g*., Pāṇḍu,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Vidura, though born from the seed of Vyāsa, are not
spoken of as ‘sons’ of Vyāsa.

It has already been explained by us what useful purpose is served by our
regarding as ‘body-bom’ or ‘legitimate,’ the sons of the *Kṣatriya* and
other wives also.

“As regards the ‘son of the Appointed Daughter,’ if this were regarded
as a ‘son,’ the number of sons would exceed *twelve*.”

What is the harm if it does? This may be the *thirteenth* kind of son.
In fact, he has not been separately mentioned, because, the useful
purpose served by him is the same as that by the ‘body-born’ son, which
fact makes him equal to this latter. That is why another Smṛti text has
declared—‘Equal to him (the Body-born son) is the son of the Appointed
Daughter.’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 2.128).—(166)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Svakṣetre*’—‘On his own wife’ (Medhātithi);—‘on his wife of the same
caste as himself’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 553);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Prayāścitta, p. 38);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 538, 557 and
689);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 38a);
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.14).—‘A son begotten by the husband himself on his
wedded wife of equal caste is called the *Aurasa*, *Body-born*, son.’

*Āpastamba* (2.13.1-2)—‘Sons begotten by a man who approaches in the
proper season, a woman of equal caste, who has not belonged to another
man, and who has been married legally, have a right to follow the
occupations of the caste and to inherit the father’s estate.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.13).—‘The first among sons is the son begotten by the
husband himself on his legally married wife.’

*Viṣṇu* (15.2).—‘The first is the son of the body—*viz*., he who is
begotten by the husband himself on his own lawfully wedded wife.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.128).—‘The body-horn son is one begotten on the legally
wedded wife.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 554).—‘One who is begotten by one’s self
on one’s legally married wife, is the body-born son, the principal
upholder of the father’s family.’

*Arthaśāstra* (II, p. 40).—‘The son begotten by the man himself on his
lawfully wedded wife is the body-born son.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

या यस्य स्वर्णा सा तस्य **क्षेत्रम्** । तस्याम् उत्पन्नः **प्राथमकल्पिक औरसो** ऽपि **विज्ञेयः** । क्षत्रियवैश्ययोस् तु जाता न संपूर्णलक्षणा औरसाः सुताः । अतस् तेषाम् [विभा]गो न्यायविरोधेन कल्पयितव्यः । अपरे तु क्षत्रियवैश्याव् एवाउरसौ क्षेत्रजादिभ्यो ज्यायांसौ मन्यन्ते ॥ ९.१६६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

166	Him whom a man begets on his own wedded wife, let him know to be a legitimate son of the body (Aurasa), the first in rank.
</details>
