+++
title = "168 माता पिता"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When in times of distress, the mother or the father affectionately gives away, with water-libations, a worthy son,—that son is called ‘given’ (adopted).—(168)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**च**शब्दः पत्ःइतुं वा युक्तः, "माता पिता च" इति[^४९७] । न ह्य् उभयोर् अपत्यम् अन्यतरानिच्छायां दातुं युक्तम् । अथापि **वा**शब्दः पठ्यते । तथा चोक्तम्- "माता पिता वा दद्यात्," "तयोर् अपि पिता श्रेयान्" (न्स्म् १.३३) इति कार्यान्तरविनियोगविषयम् एतत् । 


[^४९७]:
     DK adds: na vāśabdaḥ

- <u>ननु</u> स्वत्वापत्तौ[^४९८] मातुः स्वम् इति[^४९९] पितरि पुत्रं प्रति दातृत्वं नास्ति । 


[^४९९]:
     J: sānumāpīdṛśaṃ daśāntu


[^४९८]:
     M G J: svatvāpattau

- <u>सत्यम्</u>, पितृत इति वचने "अभावे बीजिनो माता"[^५००] (न्स्म् १.३३) इति विनियोगविशेषविषयत्वात्[^५०१] सदृशम् इत्य्[^५०२] उक्तम् । आह च वसिष्ठः- "न स्त्री पुत्रं दद्यात् प्रतिगृह्णीयाच् च" (वध् १५.३) इति ।


[^५०२]:
     J: sadṛśety


[^५०१]:
     M G: yogaviśeṣaviṣayatvāt; J: bījino nāsti viyoge viśeṣaviṣayatvāt


[^५००]:
     J: abhāvo; M G: bīninām; M G J omit: mātā

- [^५०३]**सदृशं** न जातितः, किं तर्हि कुलानुरूपैर् गुणैः । क्षत्रियादिर् अपि ब्राह्मणस्य दत्तको युज्यते । **प्रीति**ग्रहणं[^५०४] लोभादिना प्रतिषेधार्थम् ॥ ९.१६८ ॥


[^५०४]:
     M G: pratigrahaṇaṃ


[^५०३]:
     DK adds at beginning: sadṛśam ity uktaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It would be more reasonable to read ‘*ca*’ ‘and,’ instead of ‘*vā*,’
‘or’—‘The father *and* the mother’; the child belongs to both the
parents, and cannot be given away, if either of them is unwilling.

Or, we may accept the reading ‘*vā*’ ‘or’; according to another text,
which says—‘The father or the mother may give the child’; but when the
father is spoken of as the *superior* of the two parents, this
*superiority* pertains to other matters.

“Since there is the mother’s ownership also over the child, the father
cannot have the sole right to give away the son.”

True; but there are texts declaring that in the absence of the parents
(?) the child belongs to the owner of the seed. It is for this reason
that the ‘father’ has been mentioned. Vaśiṣṭha also has declared—“The
woman shall neither give away nor adopt a son.’

‘*Worthy*’;—this refers, not to *caste*, but to the presence of
qualifications in conformity with the family concerned. Thus, it is that
the Brāhmaṇa can adopt sons of the *Kṣatriya* and other castes also.

‘*Affectionately*.’—This has been added with a view to preclude *greed*
and such motives for the giving away of the child.—(168)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sadṛśam*’.—‘Equal by virtue, not by caste’ (Medhātithi);—‘Equal by
caste’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

‘*Mātā pitā ca*’.—‘Mother and father, mutually agreeing’
(Kullūka),—‘mother, if there is no father’ (Rāghavā-nanda).

‘*Prītisamyuktam*’—‘Affectionately, not out of greed’ (Medhātithi);—‘not
out of fear and so forth’ (Kullūka and Nandana);—‘not by force or fraud’
(Rāghavānanda).

‘*Āpadi*’.—‘If the adopter has no son’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘if
the adoptee’s parents are in distress’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Madnapārijāta* (p. 652), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sadṛśam* of the same caste; if the father is dead or
gone to foreign lands, and the mother finds herself in distress, she is
by herself, entitled to ‘give away’ the son; similarly if the mother
happens to be insane or dead, the father, by himself, is entitled to
give him away; in other cases the child can be given away only by the
consent of both parents;—the addition of the term ‘*āpadi*’ means that
no son can be given away in normal times; if he be given in normal
times, the sin of it falls upon the giver, not the receiver, of the son.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.132), which adds that no son should be
given under normal conditions,—this being a prohibition meant for the
*giver, not for the adopter* (adds the *Bālambhaṭṭī*), who therefore
incurs no sin;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 188b).

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 224), which adds the
following notes—‘*Āpadi*’, during a famine and so forth;—if the child is
given in normal times, the sin lies on the giver;—or it may refer to the
adopter, in which case ‘*āpadi*’ will mean ‘when he has no son’,—also on
p. 211, where ‘*sadṛśam*’ is explained as ‘of the same caste’;—it
rejects the view of Medhātithi that the Ksattriya can be adopted by the
Brāhmaṇa, and also that of the *Kafpataru* that the Brāhmaṇa can adopt a
Śūdra, on account of their being opposed to Śaunaka, Gautama and
Yājñavalkya.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 736), which adds the. following
notes:—‘*Adbhiḥ*’ stands for all those details that accompany
gifts;—‘*āpadi*’, during a famine and so forth;—or ‘*āpadi*’ may refer
to the *adopter*, in which case it will mean ‘in the event of his having
no son’;—‘*sadṛśam*’, of the same caste as the giver and the
adopter;—‘*prītisamyuktan*’, not moved by fear, or any such motive.

It is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 176);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 567),
which adds the following notes—‘*Āpadi*’, when the adopter has no
son;—‘*sadṛśam*’, of the same caste; but Medhātithi holds that the
‘equality’ is in *qualities*, not in caste;—‘*prītisamyuktam*’, free
from all fear and such other motives;—and in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 47),
which reads ‘*vā*’ (for ‘*ca*’) and remarks that in the absence of the
mother, the father alone may give away the son, or the mother may do it
in the absence of the father; it goes on to controvert Vijñāneśvara’s
view that the sin of giving away the son in *normal* times accrues to
the *giver*, not to the *adopter*;—‘*Sadṛśam*’, equal in family-status
and other qualifications, says Medhātithi; hence according to him the
*Kṣatriya* also may be adopted by the Brāhmaṇa. But it prefers the view
of Kullūka by which ‘*sadṛśam*’ means ‘of equal caste’.

This is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 38);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 557 and 692);—in *Dattakacandrīkā* (p. 48),
which explains ‘*āpadi*’ as ‘when the adopter has no son’,—and
‘*Sadṛśam*’ as ‘belonging to the same caste,’—it notes Medhātithi’s
opinion that ‘*Sadṛśam*’ means ‘possessed of equalities in keeping with
the traditions of the family,’ and hence even a Kṣatriya could be
adopted by the Brāhmaṇa, and adds that what this means is that ‘when the
Brāhmaṇa, has a *body-born* son, his other sons of the Kṣatriya and
other castes, even though not entitled to the offering of Balls and
water, yet for purposes of perpetuating his name, they serve the
purposes of a *son*’;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 38a—and Śrāddha
4a);—in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 73), which explains ‘*adbhiḥ*’ as
‘water’ and notes that it includes *Tila* and the other ingredients
also,—it explains ‘*sadṛśam*’ as ‘of the same caste’, and ‘*āpadi*’ as
‘in the event of the adopter having no son’,—it adds that
‘*Prītisamyuktam*’ (which is its reading for ‘*prītisamyuktam*’) means
that the father or mother should make over the child through love and
not through fear or covetousness;—and in *Dattakamīmānsā*’ (p. 9 and
20), which explains ‘*āpadi*’ as ‘during a famine or some such times of
distress’,—and adds that if the parents give away the child during
normal times, they incur sin.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.20).—‘He is called a *Datta*, adopted son, who, being
given away by his father and mother, or by either of the two, is
received in the place of a child.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.28-29).—‘The second is the adopted son, whom his father
and mother give in adoption.’

*Viṣṇu* (15.18-19).—‘The adopted son is the eighth; and he belongs to
him to whom he is given by his mother or father.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.130).—‘That son is called *adopted* whom the mother or
the father gives away.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 41).—‘Similar in quality to the Body-born son is the
adopted son, who is given away by the mother and the father, with
water.’

*Parāśara* (4.22).—‘That son whom his mother or father gives away is
called the *Dattaka*.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ये तु "माता पिता वा दद्याताम्" इति पठन्ति [तद् अयुक्त]म् उच्यते । समस्ताभ्यां दाननियमाद् अन्यतरापाये दत्तको न ग्राह्यः । "माता पिता वा" इत्य् अस्मिंस् तु विकल्पपक्षे समस्तयोर् दाननियमो नास्ति । **सदृशं** सवर्णम्, [जात्य्]आदितः ॥ ९.१६८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

168	That (boy) equal (by caste) whom his mother or his father affectionately give, (confirming the gift) with (a libation of) water, in times of distress (to a man) as his son, must be considered as an adopted son (Datrima).
</details>
