+++
title = "180 क्षेत्रजादीन् सुतान्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

These eleven, the ‘soil-born’ and the rest, as here described, the wise ones call ‘substitutes of a son,’—taken with a view to the failure of a religious duty.—(180)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मुख्याभावे प्रतिनिधिः । अतो ऽसत्य् औरस एते कर्तव्या इत्य् उक्तं भवति । एतेषां स्मृत्यन्तरे 

ऽन्यादृशः क्रम उक्तः । यथा गूढोत्पन्नः कैश्चित् पञ्चमो ऽपरैः षष्ठ इति । तत्र पाठक्रमो नात्राङ्गम् अत एवानियमपाठात् । प्रयोजनं चोत्तरत्रानङ्गत्वे दर्शयिष्यामः ।

- **क्रियालोपाद्** धेतोः क्रियते "अपत्यम् उत्पादयितव्यम्" इति विधिस् तस्य लोपो[^५२०] मा भूद् इति । नित्यो ह्य् अयं विधिः । स यथा कथंचिद् गृहस्थेन संपाद्यः । तत्र मुख्यः कल्प औरसः । तदसंपत्ताव् एते ऽनुकल्पा[^५२१] आश्रयितव्याः ॥ ९.१८० ॥


[^५२१]:
     M G DK: ete kalpā


[^५२०]:
     M G J: ity asya vidhilopo
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Substitute*’—when the ‘principal’ is not there; which means that these
other sons are to be taken only in the absence of the ‘legitimate’ son.

In other *Smṛtis*, these sons have been mentioned in a different order;
*e.g*., the ‘secretly born’ occupies the fifth place in one text, while
the sixth in another. But no significance attaches to the order in which
these? are mentioned; this is what is indicated by the fact that there
is no uniform order adopted by the *Smṛtis*. Even though no special
significance attaches to the order, yet a distinctly useful purpose is
served by it; as we shall explain later on.

These sons are taken ‘*with a view to*’— on account of—‘*the failure of
a religious duty*’; *i.e*., with a view to prevent the transgression of
the injunction that ‘one shall beget a child.’ This injunction is an
obligatory one, and as such, must, be acted up to by the Householder.
The principal method of doing this consists in begetting a ‘legitimate’
son; but in the absence of that, he may have recourse to the others here
described.—(180)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“These substitutes are not to be taken if there is a ‘body-born’ son
(Medhātithi),—or an ‘appointed daughter’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 574), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Putrapratinidhīn*,’ ‘substitutes of the Body-born Son
and the Appointed Daughter’,—they perform the necessary functions only
in the absence of these two;—the reason for this is supplied by the term
‘*Kriyālopāt*’—which means ‘on account of the risk of transgressing the
injunction that one should beget children’;—the injunction is an
obligatory one; and as such has to be obeyed by some means or the other;
hence when the primary method of having children fails, one must have
recourse to the secondary method of having substitutes.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, II, (p. 262), to the effect that the name
‘son’ is applied to the substitutes only figuratively;—in *Aparārka* (p.
97);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (3.259), to the effect that the substitutes are not
really sons, they are so called because they perform the functions of
the son;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 207), which notes that those
‘sons’ whose bodies are made up of the constituents of the body of one
of the two parents,—*e.g*. the ‘Kṣetraja,’ ‘Gūḍhaja,’ ‘Kānīvn’
‘Paunarbhava’ and ‘Sahoḍha’—are called ‘substitutes because the
constituents of the body of the other parent are wanting’;—and in the
case of the Appointed Daughter, even though her body is made up of the
constituents of the bodies of both parents, and as such she would appear
to be exactly like a regular ‘son,’ yet she has been regarded as a
‘substitute’ or ‘secondary son,’ on the ground that being a girl, she
has a body wherein the constituents of the *father’s* body are less than
those of the *mother’s*; it is for this reason that Yājñavalkya has
called her ‘equal’ to the ‘Body-born’ Son;—the son of the Appointed
Daughter is ‘secondary,’ the constituents of the bodies of his
grandparents existing in his body indirectly (through his mother). In
the case of the ‘Dattaka,’ ‘Krīta,’ ‘Kṛtrima,’ ‘Svayamdatta’ and
‘Apabiddha,’ on the other hand,—where the ‘son’ is not born of either of
the adoptive parents,—there is no connection at all with the
constituents of the bodies of these latter; and in their case, their
character of ‘secondary son’ would rest entirely upon the verbal
authority of the texts, and in their case the term ‘*pratinidhi*,’
‘substitute,’ would mean ‘*anukalpa*,’ ‘secondary alternative.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 837), which notes that these sons
are not regular ‘sons,’ the name being applied to them only on the
ground of their performing the functions of the son;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 552, 652 and 683);—in *Dattakamīmānsā* (p.
29);—in *Dattakacandrikā* (p. 48);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra
189b), which says that the reason for their being called ‘secondary
substitutes’ lies in the fact that there have been no marriage and other
rites performed.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (25.33-34).—‘Of the thirteen sons mentioned by Manu, the
Body-born and the Appointed Daughter continue the family.—As in default
of clarified butter, oil is admitted by the righteous as a substitute,
so are the eleven sons admitted as substitutes, in default of the
Body-born son and of the Appointed Daughter.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 576).—‘While the Body-born son or
the Appointed Daughter is there, the *Kṣetraja* and other sons,
belonging as they do to different *gotras*, are only continuers of the
family; and they perform the *śrāddha* as slaves.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एकादशानाम् अविशेषेण प्रतिनिधिवचनात् कानीनादयो ऽपि पूर्वैर् अविशिष्टाः प्रतीयन्ते । अतो यद् एषाम् अदायादबान्धवत्वम् उक्तं प्रजीवनविषये पाक्षिकदानार्थं तत् स्याद् इति व्याख्यातम्, किं अयं प्रधानेन विशिष्टकार्यप्रतिनिधिः यथा मीमांसका आहुर् इति । नेत्य् उच्यते, विषमसमीकरणस्यायुक्तत्वात् । तथा चोक्तम् "तादृशं गुणम् आप्नोति कुपुत्रैः संतरंस् तमः" इत्य् एवमादि । तथा चेदम् आहैषाम् निन्दावचनं समानबलत्वप्रतिषेधार्थम् ॥ ९.१८० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

180	These eleven, the son begotten on the wife and the rest as enumerated (above), the wise call substitutes for a son, (taken) in order (to prevent) a failure of the (funeral) ceremonies.
</details>
