+++
title = "185 न भ्रातरो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Sons alone shall inherit the father’s property, not brothers or fathers; but the father and brothers shall inherit the property of one who dies sonless.—(185)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 9.182-201)  
**

(No Bhāṣya available.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Kullūka and Rāghavānanda insert, after ‘who leave no son,’ ‘nor widow
and daughters’, and before ‘brothers’, ‘who leaves no parents.’
Nārāyaṇa, who (as also Govindarāja and Nandana) reads ‘*eva vā*’, ‘or
brothers’, says that the father inherits the estate of an undivided son
leaving no male issue, or the brothers with his permission, and that the
estate of a divided son descends to his wife and other heirs mentioned
in Yājñavalkya II, 135-136.”—Buhler.

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.132) to the
effect that *all* sons, ‘body-born’ as well as others, are entitled to
inherit the father’s property. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* quotes verse 184 and
notes that ‘son’ cannot be taken as standing for the *body-bom* sons
only; because the rights of the body-born born have been declared in
another verse already.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 653);—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 552),
which quotes the first half only;—it quotes the second half on p. 592,
where ‘*aputrasya*’ is explained as ‘without sons, primary as well as
secondary.’

The second half is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.136), as laying down that
the property of a sonless man goes to his Father or Brother;—again as
justifying the conclusion that, if the man leaves a large property, his
wife is to receive enough for her maintenance and the remainder is to go
to his brother;—again, where the view is expressed that all that is
meant is that both the Father and the Brother are entitled to inherit;
and no priority or preference is meant to be implied by the order in
which the two are mentioned;—on this the *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes that this
view is supported by the use of the particle ‘*vā*’;—again, where it is
explained as meaning that brothers inherit only in the absence of the
father.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 650 and 651);—in
*Dattakacandrikā* (p. 61);—and by Jīmūtavāhana *Dāyabhāga*, (p. 253 and
293), to the effect that it is this *brother* that inherits, not the
*brother’s son*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (17.4-8).—‘The wealth of a man who dies without male issue goes
to his wife; failing her, to his daughter; failing her to his father;
failing him, to his mother; failing her, to his brother; failing him, to
his brother’s sons; failing them, to his kinsmen; failing them, to
*Sakulyas*; failing them, to fellow-students; failing them to the King,
except in the case of the property being a Brāhmaṇa’s.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.135-136).—‘Wife, daughters, parents, brothers,
brother’s sons, *Sagotras*, kinsmen, pupils, fellow-students; among
these the succeeding inherits the property of a man dying without male
issue, only in the absence of the preceding one. Such is the law for all
castes.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Āparārka, pp. 740, 742, 745).—‘The wife being one half of
the man’s body, the man whose wife is alive is himself still alive; and
while one half of his body is alive, how can any one else take his
property? Hence in the case of a man dying without male issue, even
though his father, brothers and *Sapiṇḍas* may be living, it is his wife
who inherits his property. If the man dies without leaving a male issue
or a wife, or brother or father or mother, his property shall be divided
by his *Sapiṇḍas* in proportionate shares. If the man leaves no son, his
*Śrāddha* shall he performed by his wife; and in the absence of the
wife, by his uterine brother;—failing him, other brothers, or brothers’
sons, or *Sapiṇḍas*, or *Sakulyas*, or pupils, or Vedic scholars are
entitled to his wealth.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 741).—‘If a man dies without male issue, his
property goes to his brother; failing him, to his mother and father; or
to his senior (or junior) wife.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘The property of the son-less man shall go to his
uterine brothers, or to his daughters of the same caste as himself, or
to his father if he he living, or to brothers of the same caste as
himself, or to his mother, or to his wife;—in this same order.’

*Nārada* (Do.)—‘If among brothers, some one should die, or go away as a
Renunciate, the other brothers shall divide his property among
themselves, except the *Strīdhana*; they shall support his wives as long
as they continue to be faithful to their husband.’

*Gautama* (Do., 742).—‘The wife should obtain the property of one who
dies childless.’

*Vṛddha-manu* (Do.).—‘A widow, without a son, keeping pure the husband’s
bed, and firm in the observance of her duties, shall offer the Hall of
meal to him and take his entire property.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 745).—‘If a man dies after partition, without
leaving a male issue, his father should take his property, or his
brother, or mother, or his father’s mother, in due order.’

*Pāiṭhīnasi* (Vivadaratnākara, p. 592).—‘The property of a son-less man
goes to his brother; failing him to his mother and father, or his eldest
wife, or *Sagotras*, or pupils, or fellow-students.’

*Āpastamba* (Do., p. 596).—‘In the absence of sons, the nearest
*Sapiṇḍa*; failing him, the preceptor; failing him, the pupil.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

य एते औरसादयःपुत्राः प्रकृतास् त एव रिक्थहराः स्युः । क्षेत्रजादयो ऽप्य् औरसासंभवे । कुत एतत् । प्रकरणसामर्थ्यात् सत्य् अपि संनिकृष्टतरत्वे पितुर् भ्रातुश् च नैव रिक्थभाजः स्युः । **अपुत्रस्य पिता हरेत्**, तदभावे भ्रातरः । एवं चौरसस्य पितृधनप्राप्तौ सिद्धायां क्षेत्रजादिसुतप्राप्त्यर्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः । यथ्श् चेदम् आह ॥ ९.१८५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

185	Not brothers, nor fathers, (but) sons take the paternal estate; but the father shall take the inheritance of (a son) who leaves no male issue, and his brothers.
</details>
