+++
title = "186 त्रयाणाम् उदकम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

To three should water-libation be offered; to three is the cake offered; the fourth is the giver of these offerings; there can be no fifth.—(186)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 9.182-201)  
**

(No Bhāṣya available.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to Kullūka and Rāghvānanda the verse is meant to indicate the
right of the *kṣetraja* and other secondary sons to inherit the estate
of grand-father and others dying childless.—According to Nandana it
indicates the right of grand-sons and great grand-sons to inherit before
brothers and the rest.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 592);—in *Aparārka* (p.
744), as describing the ‘nearest sapiṇḍas’; the sense being that that
sapiṇḍa is the ‘nearest’ who makes water-offerings to the same persons
(father, grandfather and great-grandfather); so that the uterine brother
would be the ‘nearest’; the son of the uterine brother would he one step
removed, as his ‘father’ would be different;—still one further removed
would be the brother’s grandson, as his ‘father’ and ‘grandfather’ would
both be different; so on with the others.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 134), to the effect that the
father, the grandfather and the great-grandfather, irrespective of their
wives, are the ‘*deities*’ (*i.e*., recipients) of the water and other
offerings;—and again on p. 195;—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
655);—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 198b);—and by Jīmūtavāhana
(*Dāyabhāga*, pp. 157 and 253).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.186-189)  
**

[\[See Text under
185.\]]

*Mānava-Śrāddhakalpa* (III).—(Same as Manu.)

*Āpastamba* (2.14.2-5).—‘On failure of sons, the nearest *Sapiṇḍa* takes
the property; failing him, the preceptor; failing him the pupil, who may
use it for the teacher’s benefit or enjoy it himself; or the daughter
may take the property; on the failure of all relations, let the King
take the property.’

*Gautama* (28.21).—‘*Sapiṇḍas*, *Sagotras*, those connected by descent
from the same *Ṛṣi*, and the wife shall share the estate of a person
dying without male issue (or an Appointed Daughter).’

Do. (28.41, 42).—‘Śrotriyas shall divide the estate of a childless
Brāhmaṇa;—the King shall take the property of the other castes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.9-15).—‘The great-grand-father, the grand-father, the
father, one’s own-self, the uterine brothers, the son by a wife of equal
caste, the grand-son and the great-grand-son,—these they call
*Sapiṇḍas*; and amongst these, the son and the son’s son (together with
the father) are sharers of an undivided oblation; sharers of divided
oblations, they call *Sakulyas*. If no other relations are living, the
property of the deceased man descends to his *Sapiṇḍas*; on the failure
of *Sapiṇḍas*, the *Sakulyas* inherit; on the failure of these, the
preceptor who takes the place of the spiritual father, a pupil or an
officiating priest shall take the property; on failure of these, the
King, who shall give that property to persons versed in the three Vedas;
but the King shall never take the property of the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.81-84).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* or the subsidiary sons shall
divide the property of him who has no son of the first six kinds; on
failure of them, the preceptor and the pupil shall take the property; on
failure of these two, the King inherits; but the King shall never take
the property of a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇu* (17.10-14).—‘Failing brother’s sons, the property goes to the
relations called *Bandhu*; failing these, to those called *Sakulya*;
failing these, to a fellow-student; failing him, to the King, except
when it is Brāhmaṇa’s property;—the property of the Brāhmaṇas goes to
Brāhmaṇas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2. 135-130).—‘The wife, daughters, parents, brothers,
brother’s sons, *Sagotṛa, Bandhu*—relations, pupils,
fellow-students,—from among these in the absence of the preceding, the
succeeding inherits the property of the man who dies without male issue.
This is the law for all castes.’ *Nārada* (Aparārka,p. 715).—‘Inthe
absence of daughters, the property goes to *Sakulyas* and *Bāndhuvas*,
and then to people of the same caste; and failing all these, to the
King. In the absence of all relations, the holy Brāhmaṇas learned in the
Vedas inherit the property; the property of the Brāhmaṇa shall not be
taken by the King; of men of other castes, the property shall be taken
by the King.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 716).—‘The property of the learned Brāhmaṇa
goes to the Assembly, *not to* the King.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रकृतस्य संनिकर्षस्य विभवनार्थो ऽयं श्लोकः ॥ ९.१८६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

186	To three (ancestors) water must be offered, to three the funeral cake is given, the fourth (descendant is) the giver of these (oblations), the fifth has no connection (with them).
</details>
