+++
title = "194 अध्यग्न्य्-अध्यावाहनिकन् दत्तम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(1) What is given before the fire, (2) what is given at the time of departure, (3) what is given in token of love, and what is received from (4) the brother, (5) the mother and (6) the father,—has been declared to be ‘Strīdhana’ (the exclusive property of the woman).—(194)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 9.182-201)  
**

(No Bhāṣya available.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 368), which
notes that the term ‘six-fold’ is meant to preclude a *lesser*, not a
*larger*, number;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.135-136), as setting aside the view
that women have no rights to property except through their husband or
son *Bālambhaṭṭī* explaining ‘*adhyagni*’ as that obtained near the fire
at the marriage ceremony,—‘*adhyāvāhanikam*’ as that obtained at the
time of her coming to her husband’s place;—It is quoted again under
2.143, where it is noted that the *six* kinds mentioned are meant only
as denying a lesser number; it goes on to quote Kātyāyana as explaining
each of these terms:—‘(1)That which is given to the girl at the time of
marriage near the fire is called *adhyagni*,—(2) what she receives at
the time of being carried away from her father’s house is called
*adhyāvāhanika*,—(3) what she receives as a loving present from her
father-in-law or mother-in-law at the time of offering obeisance is
called *prītidatta*,—(4) (5) (6) whatever the married girl receives from
her husband or from her parents or brothers is called *Saudāyika*.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 522), which offers the following
explanations:—‘*Adhyagni*’, what is given by anyone at the time of
marriage,—‘*adhyāvāhanika*’, whatever is carried behind her when she is
being carried away from her father’s house,—Medhātithi however holds
that *adhyāvāhanika* is what she receives from her parents-in-law at the
time of returning to her father’s place; and this view also maybe
accepted;—‘*prititaḥ dattam*’, what she receives from the father-in-law
and other elders as a reward for her character, efficiency and other
good qualities;—the mention of ‘six kinds’ is for the purpose of
precluding a lesser, not a larger, number; in fact a seventh kind,
‘*ādhivedanīka*’—what she receives by way of compensation for being
superseded by another—has also been mentioned by Yājñavalkya.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 68), which also remarks that the
‘six’ are mentioned only for the purpose of denying a lesser number;—and
in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 51), which explains ‘*adhyagni*’ as ‘what is
given to the woman before the fire’,—‘*adhyāvāhanikam*’ as ‘given to her
by her father and relatives at the time of her
marriage,’—‘*prītikarmaṇi*’, ‘given by the husband as a token of
conjugal love’—and—‘*prāptam*’ as given to her, even after her marriage,
by her brother and others.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.194-195)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (17.18).—‘What has been given to a woman by her father, mother,
sons, or brothers, what she has received before the sacrificial fire at
the marriage ceremony, what she receives on supersession, what has been
given to her by her relatives, her nuptial fee, and a gift subsequent,
are called *strīdhana*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.143).—‘What is given to a woman by her father, mother,
son or brother,—what is given before the nuptial fire, and what comes to
her in connection with her supersession has been called *strīdhana*.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 751).—‘What is given to a woman near the
nuptial fire by gentlemen is called *Adhyagni strīdhana*. What the woman
obtains at the time of her being taken away from her father’s house is
called the *Adhyāvāhanika strīdhana*. What is given to her, through
affection, by her father in-law or mother-in-law, at the time of her
bowing to them, is called *Lāvaṇyārjita*. What is obtained by a married
woman or her husband at her father’s house, either from her parents or
her brother, is called *Saudāyika*. Over the *Saudāyika*, the ownership
of the woman is absolute and she is free to sell it or given it away,
even when it consists of immovable property. What the woman obtains,
after marriage, from her husband’s family, or from her husband’s
parents, is called *Anvādheya* by Bhṛgu. While she is alive, neither her
husband nor her sons nor her brother-in-law nor her husband’s kinsmen,
have any rights over her *strīdhana*; if they take it from her they
should he punished.’

*Vṛddha-Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 752).—‘Whatever the girl obtains, at
marriage or after marriage, from her father’s or brother’s house, is
called *Saudāyika*. At the marriage of the girl whatever is given with
reference to the bridegroom forms the property of the girl, not to be
divided by her kinsmen.’

*Nārada* (Do., p. 752).—‘What is given to her, through love, by her
husband, that she shall enjoy as site chooses, even after his death,
with the exception of immovable property.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 524).—‘*Adhyagni*, *Adhyāvāhanika*,
*Bhartṛdāya* (inherited from her husband), what is given by her brother
and what is given by her mother and what is given by her father,—these
are the six kinds of *strīdhana*.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.597).—‘The *Saudāyika* property is known to be that
which comes to a married woman through gifts and dowries, from her
parents’ or husband’s families, or through presents from parents and
relatives.’

*Pāraskara* (Parāśaramādhava, Vyavahāra, p. 372).—‘The *strīdhana*
belongs to the unmarried daughter; the son cannot have it; if the
daughter has been married, the son shall share it equally with her.’

[(See the texts under
192-193.)]

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 573).—‘Neither the husband, nor the
son, nor the father, nor the brothers have the right to take away or to
spend a woman’s *strīdhana*; if any one of them takes away the
*strīdhana* forcibly, he should be made to make it good along with
interest, and should also pay a fine; if any one makes use of it with
her permission, and in a manner agreeable to her, he should repay it, if
he has the wealth to do it. Whatever the woman may have lovingly given
to any of the above relations during his sickness or when he was in
trouble or harassed by creditors,—that also he may voluntarily repay.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

षड्विधस्य नियमात् मैत्रलब्धस्य स्त्रीधनत्वं नास्ति । अध्यग्नीयम् अग्निसमीप उह्यमानायै दत्तम् । अध्यावाहनिकं पत्या स्वगृहम् आनीयमानायै दीयते ॥ ९.१९४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

194	What (was given) before the (nuptial) fire, what (was given) on the bridal procession, what was given in token of love, and what was received from her brother, mother, or father, that is called the sixfold property of a woman.
</details>
