+++
title = "197 यत् त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

It is ordained that the property of women married by the ‘Brāhma,’ the ‘Daiva,’ the ‘Ārṣa,’ the ‘Gāndharva,’ or the ‘Prājāpatya’ form, shall go to her husband alone, if she dies childless.—(196)


But the property given to a woman on the ‘Āsura’ or other (inferior) forms of marriage, has been held to belong to her parents, upon her dying childless.—(197)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 9.182-201)  
**

(No Bhāṣya available.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 9.196-197)**

‘*Vasu*’—includes, according to Nārāyaṇa, all kinds of property,
‘*strīdhana*’ as well as what is not ‘*strīdhana*’.

These verses are quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 373), which
explains the meaning to be that on the death of a woman married by any
of the forms of marriage here named, without leaving any heir—beginning
from the daughter down to the son’s son,—her property goes to her
*husband*, and not to her mother or other relations,—while the property
of an heirless woman, who has been married by the Āsura, Rākṣasa or
Paiśāca forms, goes to her parents.

They are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 753), which remarks that the
devolution of the property on the husband should be regarded as an
optional alternative; it apparently takes ‘*āsurādiṣu*’ of verse 191 as
including all those mentioned under 196.

They are quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 519), which explains
‘*aprajasi*’ as ‘childless’; and the verses to mean that (*a*) in the
case of those married by the forms of marriage mentioned in 196, the
property goes to the husband, and (*b*) in that of those married by the
forms mentioned in 197, it goes to her father;—it goes on to remark that
this refers to what the woman had received at the time of marriage.

They are quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 72);—in *Smṛtitattva* II (p.
186), which explains the meaning to be that the ‘*strīdhana*’ obtained
at the time of the marriage under the forms mentioned in 196 goes to the
husband, while that obtained at the time of marriage under the forms
mentioned in 197 goes first to her mother, and in her absence to her
father;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 756);—in *Dāyākramasaṅgraha* (p.
23);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Culcutta, p. 143), which explains
‘*aprajāyām*’ as ‘childless’; and by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 141).

Verse 197 is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 219a), which says that
the ‘mother’ being placed first in the compound implies that the father
is to inherit the property only after the mother.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.196-197)**

*Viṣṇu* (17, 19.20).—‘If a woman, married according to one of the first
four forms of marriage beginning with *Brāhma*, dies without issue, her
*strīdhana* goes to her husband;—if she has been married by one of the
four reprehensible forms of marriage, her father shall take her
property.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.141-145).—‘If a woman dies without issue, her kinsmen
shall obtain what she had got from her kinsmen, or as her nuptial fee or
as the *Anvādheyaka* present; if a woman married according to the four
forms of marriage beginning with the Brāhma, dies without issue, her
property goes to her husband; if she had issue, it goes to her
daughters;—if she had been married by the other forms of marriage, her
property goes to her father.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 518).—‘In the absence of the daughter, the
*Strīdhana* of the mother should go to the sons; what was given to her
by her kinsmen should go to her husband, in the absence of kinsmen. The
sisters along with their husbands shall divide with the kinsmen, the
*strīdhana*. Such is the lawful law of partition.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतेष्व् आसुरादिषु कल्या[नेषु तयोः] प्रत्यर्पयितव्यं धनम् ॥ ९.१९७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

197	But it is prescribed that the property which may have been given to a (wife) on an Asura marriage or (one of the) other (blamable marriages, shall go) to her mother and to her father, if she dies without issue.
</details>
