+++
title = "201 अनंशौ क्लीब-पतितौ"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Eunuchs and outcasts, those born blind or deaf, idiots and the dumb, as well as those deficient in any organ, are entitled to no shares.—(201)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 9.182-201)  
**

(No Bhāṣya available.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 385), as enumerating
persons not entitled to inheritance, and hence to the offering of
funeral oblations;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 201, and again on
p. 366), where ‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ is explained as ‘whose organs have become
deficient through some disease’;—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.140), which has the
following notes;—‘*Nirindriya*’ is one whose organs have disappeared by
reason of some disease;—these persons are debarred from inheritance,
being entitled to mere subsistence and clothing; if they are not
supported, his relations become degraded. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following explanations:—‘*Jātyandha-badhirāḥ*’ are those who are blind
and deaf by birth,—‘*mūka*’ is one who is incapable from birth of
uttering words,—thus are these two distinguished from ‘*nirindriya*,’
which means those who have lost some organ as the result of disease.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 487), which adds the following
notes:—The term ‘*jāti*’ is added with a view to denote
incurability,—‘*jaḍa*,’ one who is incapable of distinguishing what is
his own and what belongs to others,—‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ includes the lame
and the like, who are not entitled to the performance of *śrauta* and
*smārta* rites;—and in *Dāyakramasaṅgraha*, (p. 29).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha*, (p. 73), which explains
‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ as devoid of the olfactory and other organs;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 40), which explains ‘*nirindriya*’ as one
who has lost his organs through disease;—and in *Madanapārijāta*, (p.
682), which has the same explanation of ‘*nirindriya*’ and adds that all
these men have no share in the property, but they have to he supported.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.201-202)  
**

*Gautama* (18.43).—‘An idiot and a eunuch should he supported.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486).—‘According to some, even the son born of
the wife of equal caste should not receive inheritance if she is
addicted to unrighteousness.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.37-40)—‘Granting food, clothes and shelter, they shall
support those who are incapable of transacting business; *viz*., the
blind, the idiot, those immersed in vice, the incurable invalid, and the
like;—as also those who are neglectful of their duties and
occupations;—but not the outcast or his offspring.’

*Āpastamba* (2.14.1).—‘He should, during his life-time, divide his
property equally amongst his sons,—excepting the eunuch, the insane and
the outcast.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486)—‘All who are endowed with righteousness
are inheritors of property; if one uses wealth unrighteously, him the
father shall disinherit, even if he be the eldest son.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.52-54).—‘But those who have entered a different order
receive no share;—nor those who are eunuchs, insane or outcasts;—the
eunuch and the insane have a claim to maintenance.’

*Viṣṇu* (15.32-33).—‘Outcasts, eunuchs, persons incurably diseased, and
those deficient in organs of sense or action, do not receive a
share;—but they should be maintained by those who take the inheritance.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.140).—‘The eunuch, the outcast, the son of the outcast,
the cripple, the insane, the idiot, the blind and one suffering from an
incurable disease have no share in the property; but they should be
maintained.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 749).—‘One who harbours ill-will towards his
father, the outcast, the eunuch and one who has committed one of the
minor offences, should not receive any share, even when they are
body-born sons;—what to say of those that are only *Kṣetraja* sons?’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 489).—Those suffering from chronic or incurable
diseases, the idiot, the insane, the blind and the cripple should be
supported by the family; but their sons are entitled to shares in the
property.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 750).—‘One born of a wife married irregularly, one
begotten by a *Sagotra* husband, and one who has gone away as a
renunciate, do not inherit property.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486).—‘One who has been
excommunicated ceases to have any claims to inheritance or the funeral
offering of food and water.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 487).—‘Even though a son may have been born from a
wife of equal caste, yet he cannot inherit property if he is devoid of
good qualities.’

*Devala* (Do., p. 489).—‘On the father’s death, the eunuch, the leper,
the insane, the idiot, the blind, the outcast, the outcast’s child and
the religious hypocrite, do not share in the inheritance; but food and
clothing are given to all these, except the outcast. The sons of these
however, if they are free from defects, should receive their share in
the property.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इत्य् अनेन पीठसर्पिपंग्वादयो ऽपि गृह्यन्ते सामर्थ्यात् ॥ ९.२०१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

201	Eunuchs and outcasts, (persons) born blind or deaf, the insane, idiots and the dumb, as well as those deficient in any organ (of action or sensation), receive no share.
</details>
