+++
title = "204 यत् किम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whatever property the eldest brother acquires after the death of the father, a share of that shall belong to the younger brothers, if they are devoted to learning.—(204)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^५३३]:
     M G: -pālitaḥ

पितृक्रमागतान् मित्राद् राजामात्यपुरोहितादेर् वा[^५३४] क्षेत्राद् वा कयाचिद् युक्त्याधिकोत्पत्तिं जनयेत् तत् सर्वेषां साधारणम् । नैव मन्तव्यम् "मयैतद्बुद्ध्या पित्रा प्राग् अनुपार्जितं[^५३५] मयैतल् लब्धं ममैवैतत्" इति । **विद्यानुपालिन** इति वचनाद् विद्याजीविनां शिल्पिकारुकप्रभृतीनाम् एष विधिर् वैद्यनटगायनादीनाम् ॥ ९.२०४ ॥


[^५३५]:
     M G: anupārjitā


[^५३४]:
     M G: -purohitād eva
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the eldest brother acquires more properly, either through some
hereditary friend, or from the king or his ministers or his priests, or
out of the farm, by the employment of special methods,—such property
shall be common to all the brothers; and the eldest brother shall not
entertain any such notion as that—‘this property, which was not acquired
by our father, has been acquired by me, through my own efforts, and
hence it is mine only.’

‘*Devoted to learning*’;—this shows that the rule here laid down
pertains to mechanics, artisans and others who subsist by learning; such
as physicians, dancers, musicians and so forth—(204)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This refers to a united family—as rightly remarked by Kullūka.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 507), which explains the
meaning to be that, if after the death of the father, the eldest brother
should happen to acquire some property by means of exceptional learning
or such other means, in that property the acquirer shall have two
shares, and each of the younger brothers one share, if they are devoted
to study.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.118), which notes the explanation of the
verse as that ‘on the death of the father, or even during the father’s
life-time, if any brother, eldest, youngest or the middle one, happen to
die, his shares are to go to the other brothers, and that, the
implication is that wealth obtained from friends and so forth is
partible’,—and then goes on to criticise it as unwarranted, and
concludes that the verse sets forth an exception to the general rule
that property acquired by each brother separately is impartible.

It is quoted by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 192), which adds that the
younger brothers are as much entitled to inherit the property of the
eldest brother as that of the father,—but with this difference that the
father’s property they inherit even when they are not learned, but to
the brother’s property only those are entitled who are learned.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.204-208)  
**

*Gautama* (28.30 31).—‘What a learned co-parcener has acquired by his
own efforts, he may, at his pleasure, withhold from his unlearned
co-parceners. Unlearned co-parceners shall divide their acquisitions
equally.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.116, 118-119).—‘If one is able to support himself and
does not desire a share in the father’s property, he shall be separated
after having been given some little trifle; the law is that the
division, equal or unequal, should be exactly as the father makes it.—If
among co-parceners some one has, by himself acquired some property,
without detriment to the paternal property,—and if he has obtained
friendly or nuptial gifts,—all such property shall not go to the
co-parceners. If the ancestral property had been taken away by
strangers, and subsequently one of the co-parceners recovers it, he
shall not give it to the other co-parceners; similarly whatever one may
have gained by learning.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.105.11.)

*Viṣṇu* (18.42).—(Same as Manu 208.)

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Aparārka, p. 724).—If one of the co-parceners recovers the
landed property previously lost, the other co-parceners shall receive
their share of it, after having given the fourth part of it to the
recoverer.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If some one, living upon food given by a stranger,
has acquired learning, and by means of learning thus acquired, he
acquires some property, that property is what is called the *gain of
learning*; and such property is not divided; what one obtains from a
pupil, or from officiating at sacrifices, or by answering doubtful
questions, or by putting questions, or by expounding his own knowledge
or by teaching—this also is called the *gain of learning*; such property
is not to be divided, etc., etc., etc. The learned shall not give to the
unlearned any part of what he has gained by learning, but they shall
give a share to those who are superior, or even equal to them in
learning.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 507).—‘Those who acquired learning in
the family itself, either from their father or from their brothers,—if
such persons acquire property by their learning or by bravery, that
shall be divided—says Bṛhaspati.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 725).—‘What is acquired by learning or by bravery,
or as a present in marriage,—all this shall not be sought after by
co-parceners at the time of partition.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 510).—‘What was given to one by the
grandfather or the father as a loving gift, as also what was given by
the mother, should not be taken away from him.’

Do. (Do., p. 502).—‘The property that one has acquired by his own
effort, without drawing upon the paternal property,—as also what he has
gained by his learning,—all this he shall not give to his co-parceners.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘The learned shall not give to the unlearned any part of
his gain of learning, unless he wishes to do so; provided that he had
acquired those gains without employing any part of the paternal property
for that purpose. The brother who supports the family of the brother
while the latter is acquiring learning, should, even though he be
unlearned, obtain some share of the property acquired by that learned
brother. (Then it reproduces Manu 204.)’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 501).—‘The property acquired by bravery, or
inherited from one’s wife, or that acquired by learning,—these are
declared to be not liable to division; so also what may have been given
by the father as a loving gift, or what the mother may have given
through love, out of her own property.’

Do. (Do., p. 508).—‘In a joint family whatever conveyances or weapons
one member acquires through bravery and such qualities, in that the
brothers also shall have shares ; *i.e*., the acquirer shall have two
shares and the rest, one share each.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 503).—‘There shall be no division of the
dwelling-house, of water-vessels, of ornaments, of such women and
clothes as have been used, and of water-drains,—so says Prajāpati.’

*Gautama* (Do., p. 508).—‘Among brothers living in the joint family,
what the learned acquires by learning—the unlearned also shall divide
equally.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘Those who may have specially worked to acquire the
property shall receive two shares.’

*Brhaṣpati* (25.77-78).—‘If among re-united co-parceners, anyone should
acquire property through learning, valour, or other independent effort
of his own, a double share must be given to him; the rest shall take
equal shares. Whatever has been given to one by the paternal
grandfather, or the father, or the mother, all that shall not be taken
from him; he shall keep likewise the property acquired by valour, and
also the wealth of his wife.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ज्येष्ठलब्धस्य वैद्याः सन्तो भागिनो यवीयांसः, न तु कनिष्ठलब्धस्य ज्यायान् इत्य् एतद् अर्थाल् [लभ्यते] ॥ ९.२०४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

204	Whatever property the eldest (son) acquires (by his own exertion) after the father's death, a share of that (shall belong) to his younger (brothers), provided they have made a due progress in learning.
</details>
