+++
title = "209 पैतृकन् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the father recovers a lost ancestral property, he shall not, unless he so wishes, share it with his sons,—being, as it is his self-acquired property.—(209)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ग्रहणाद् अन्यद् अर्थयन् पित्रा[^५४७] **स्वयम् अर्जितं** तद् आकामो न विभजनीयो ऽधिकारप्राप्तैर् अपि पुत्रैः ।


[^५४७]:
     DK: cet svayaṃ vidyāśauryādinā (this sentence seems to be corrupt in all editions)

- <u>कः</u> पुनर् जीवति पितरि पुत्राणां विभागकालः ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । यदा तावत् स्वयं पिता पुत्रान् विभजते, तदोक्तम्[^५४८] "मातुर् निवृत्ते रजसि" (न्स्म् १३.३) इति "जीवति वेच्छति"[^५४९] (ग्ध् २८.२) इति । तथा "पितर्य् अपगतस्पृहे,"निवृत्ते वापि रमणे"[^५५०] (न्स्म् १३.३) इति । अन्यथा तु यदैव प्राप्ताः पुत्रा भवन्ति, तदैव[^५५१] ते पितामहधनस्येशते । तथा चोक्तम्-


[^५५१]:
     M G: yatas; DK: yadaiva


[^५५०]:
     J gives the whole verse: mātur nivṛtte rajasi prattāsu bhaginīṣu ca | nivṛtte cāpi ramaṇe pitary uparataspṛhe (probably Jha simply took this from the edition of NSm)


[^५४९]:
     M G: cecchati


[^५४८]:
     J: tad uktam

- भूर् या पितामहोपात्ता निबन्धो द्रव्यम् एव वा ।

- तत्र स्यात् सदृशं स्वाम्यं पितुः पुत्रस्य चोभयोः ॥ (य्ध् २.१२४)

- सत्य् अपि च पुत्रस्य स्वाम्ये, यावद् अप्राप्तास् तावत्[^५५२] । सर्वथा विशेषाभावात् सर्वे[^५५३] पितामहधनभाजः स्वत्वपूर्वकत्वाद् विभागस्य । बन्धक्रयादिक्रियासु पितृधनं जातपुत्रेण न[^५५४] नियोक्तव्यम् । योगकुटुम्भभरणादौ तु विनियोगो दर्शितः । आचारेण सत्य् अपि चास्याम्[^५५५] अवस्थायां पुत्राणां स्वाम्ये "पित्रा चाकामेन विभक्तान्"[^५५६] (ग्ध् १५.१९) इति निन्दादर्शनाद् बलाद् विभाजयन्तः पापा इत्य् अनुमीयते । यथासत्प्रतिग्रहेण[^५५७] भवति स्वाम्यम्, दोषस् तु पुरुषस्य, तेनान्वयागतम् इतीदृशम् अशुद्धम् एव । अतः संभवत्य् उपायान्तरे न पितार्थनीयः । अधर्मो हि तथा स्यात् । 


[^५५७]:
     J: yathāsatkṛtaprati-


[^५५६]:
     M G: putrakāmena vā vibhakāv


[^५५५]:
     M G DK: ācāre cāsyām


[^५५४]:
     M G omit: na


[^५५३]:
     M G add: saty api


[^५५२]:
     DK adds: nāsti

- स्वयम् अर्जितम् अपि धनम् अधिकारप्राप्तान् गुणवतः पुत्रान् ज्ञात्वा विभक्तव्यम् एव । उक्तं च "वयसि स्थितः पिता पुत्रान् विभजेत् । ज्येष्ठं श्रेष्ठांशेनेतरान् समैर् अंशैः" (च्ड़्। न्स्म् १३.४) इति । न चैतत् पितामहधनविषयम् । न हि तत्र पिता ज्येष्ठस्याधिकांशदानाय प्रभवति, तुल्यात्वाद् उभयोः स्वाम्यस्य । यत् त्व् इदम्- "न्यूनाधिकविभक्तानां धर्म्यः पितृकृतः स्मृतः" (य्ध् २.१२०) इति, तत् पितामहे ऽपि स्वल्पया मात्रयेच्छन्ति । यत्र न परिपूर्णं भागद्वयं गृहीतं स्वयम् अर्जितविषये ह्य् अपवाद एव स्यात् ॥ ९.२०९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If in addition to what he has inherited, the father recovers such
ancestral property as had become lost, he shall not, unless he wishes
it, share it with his sons, even after these latter have attained their
majority.

“But what would he the occasion for partition among sons while the
father is still alive?”

The answer to this is that such an occasion would arise when the father
himself proceeds to make the division among his sons. This is what has
been thus declared (by *Gautama*, 28.2)—‘When their mother has ceased to
menstruate, and when the father, though living, desires it, the sons
shall divide the property’;—and again ‘When the father has ceased to
have any longings, and when he has ceased to have intercourse with his
wife’ (*Nārada* 13.3).

As a matter of fact, if there were no such restrictions, the son would
become entitled to their grandfather’s property as soon as they were
born; as it has been declared that—‘over the property movable or
immovable, that has been left by the grandfather, both the father and
the son have the same right.’ Having this right, all the sons are
entitled to equal shares in their grandfather’s property; since *shares*
only follow the *right*.

The father, after the birth of his son, shall not invest his ancestral
property in mortgages or purchases; but using it for the proper
maintenance of his family however has been permitted. In actual
practice, even though, under the circumstances, the sons have a right
over the ancestral property, yet from the deprecatory assertion—‘the
sone (son/one?) who divide the property against their father’s wish are
to be deprecated’—it follows that the sons who force the partition on
their father incur a sin. Such as even though one may acquire property
by receiving constant gifts, yet the act of acquiring such property is
blameworthy. Similarly, even though the property (thus shared with the
unwilling father) is the hereditary property of the sons, yet it is open
to censure. For this reason, so long as they have any other means, the
sons should never ask their father for a partition; as such asking would
be immoral.

As a matter of fact, even in the case of the father’s self-acquired
property, he himself divides it among his sons as soon as they have
attained their majority and he finds them duly qualified. It has also
been declared that—‘when the father has reached old age, he shall
himself divide the property among his sons, allotting to the eldest a
preferential share, and equal shares to the rest,’ (*Nārada*, 13.4).
This, however, does not apply to the property that may have boon left by
the grandfather; because, out of that, the father has no power to allot
any ‘preferential share’—the right of both parties over it being equal.

As for the declaration—‘unequal division has been declared to be legal,
when made by the father’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 2.116),—this has been taken to
apply to a certain extent to the grandfather’s property also. In a case
where there are no two full shares, there would be an exception, in the
case of self-acquired property. (?)—(209)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse has been taken by Nārāyaṇa to imply that ancestral property
may be divided by the sons even during the life-time of the father, even
though the latter may be unwilling.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.121), which explains the meaning
as follows:—“If a property was acquired by the grandfather, but taken
away by some one else and not redeemed during his life-time, when such
property has been redeemed by the father (the grandfather’s son), this
is as good as ‘self-acquired’ by the father, and hence the father may
not divide this with his sons, unless he is himself willing to do so”;
and it takes this to imply that in the case of other kinds of ancestral
property the sons may force partition on the father.—The *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds that ‘*svārjitam*’ being explained as ‘as good as self-acquired’,
the explanation of it given by ‘Medhātithi—as ‘acquired by his own
learning &c.’—becomes unacceptable.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 461), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Paitṛkam*’, ancestral—‘*anavāpyam*’ (which is its reading for
‘*anavāptam*’), which is hard to be recovered by the father; such
property being ‘self-acquired’ by the father, he shall not divide it
with his sons, except when he is quite willing.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 339), which has the
same explanation as *Mitākṣarā*;—in *Dāyatattva* (p. 9);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 35a);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p.
126), to the effect that in regard to the property acquired by the
father, independently of his ancestral property, sons have no voice, he
himself being the sole disposer of it;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra
177b), which explains ‘*svayamārjitam*’, (1) as ‘*svayamarjitamiva*’,
‘it is *as if it were* his self-acquired property’; and (2) as giving
the reason for the law laid down, ‘*since*,’ ‘it is his self-acquired
property’;—and says that ‘*akāmaḥ*’ implies that *if the father so
wishes*, he may divide the property among his sons;—and by Jīmūtavāhana
(*Dāyabhāga*, p. 201).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (18.43).—‘If a man recovers a property which could not before be
recovered by his father, he shall not, unless by his own free will,
divide it with his sons; as it is an acquisition made by himself.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.119).—‘If one recovers an ancestral property that had
been taken away by others, he shall not give it to his co-parceners; nor
what he has acquired by his learning.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Aparārka, p. 724).—‘If one of the co-parceners recovers
landed property that had been lost, the other co-parceners also shall
have shares in it, alter making over to him a fourth part as his special
share.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 339).—‘If a property that
belonged to the grandfather but became lost, is recovered by the father
by his own effort, or what is acquired by him by his valour or
learning,—over that property the father’s right is absolute.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘What had become lost,—if that is recovered by the
father through his own effort,—all that the father cannot he forced to
share with his sons.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पितामहधनस्येतरे ऽपीशत इत्य् अनया शङ्कया प्रतिषेधः । अनेन च दर्शनेन सत्यां विभागप्रतिपत्तौ वित्तं सर्वं विभजनीयम् । पित्रा पुत्रविभागस्यैतद् दर्शनम् । जीवपितृकाणाम् अस्ति विभाग इत्य् एतद् दर्शयति ॥ ९.२०९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

209	But if a father recovers lost ancestral property, he shall not divide it, unless by his own will, with his sons, (for it is) self-acquired (property).
</details>
