+++
title = "211 येषाञ् ज्येष्ठः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the eldest or the youngest of the brothers should be deprived of his shares,—or if either of them dies,—his share does not become lost.—(211)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**येषां** भ्रातॄणां **ज्येष्ट्ःअः कनिष्ठो वा** भ्राता **अंशप्रदानाद् धीयते **। अंशप्रदानं विभागकालः । हीयते पातित्याद्यविभागार्थं[^५५९] च हेतुम् आसादयेत् । **म्रियेत** वा । **तस्य भागो न लुप्यते** । तस्येयं प्रतिपत्तिः ॥ ९.२११ ॥


[^५५९]:
     M G: pādetyādyavi-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If among the brothers, ‘*the eldest or the youngest*’ brother ‘should be
*deprived of his share*’—by being found to be debarred on account of
having become an out-east or stone such disability,—or ‘*if he
dies*’—‘*his share does not become lost*’;—how this share shall be
disposed of is explained in the following verse.—(211)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Hīyetāṃśapradānataḥ*,’—‘On account of having become an outcast and so
forth’ (Medhātithi),—‘by becoming an ascetic’ (Kullūka and Nandana),—‘by
having emigrated’ (Nandana),—‘by becoming an eunuch after the first
partition’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Bhāgo na lupyate*.’—‘His share must not be divided by his co-parceners
among themselves’ (Nārāyaṇa); ‘the disposal of his share is prescribed
in the next verse’ (Medhātithi, Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2. 139), which explains the meaning
as follows:—‘among united brothers, if, at the time of partition,
one—either the eldest or the middle or the youngest—should happen to be
disqualified from receiving his share—either by entering another stage
of life or by committing such heinous sins as the killing of a Brāhmaṇa,
or if he happen to die,—then his share is not lost, *i*. *e*., it has to
be set aside, and not divided among his co-parceners’.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 678), which adds the same
explanation as *Mitākṣarā*; but as grounds of disqualification, it
mentions ‘entering of another life-stage or becoming an outcast’; it
adds that the next verse lays down what is to be done with the share
thus set aside.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 749), which explains ‘*amṣhapradāna*’ as
*partition*; and points out that ‘*hīyate*’ means disqualification by
reason of ‘renunciation’, ‘becoming an outcast’ and so forth; his share
however is not lost, does not disappear,—it has to be determined and
disposed of as laid down in the next verse.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 601), which explains as
follows:—‘Hence among united brothers, if anyone should take to
renunciation, or by some such cause become deprived of his share, or
should happen to die, his share does not disappear’;—and in *Dāyatattva*
(p. 55).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 67), which explains ‘*hīyate*’ as
‘by reason of entering another state or becoming an outcast—and in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 362), which adds the following
explanation:—‘Among united brothers, who are sons of different mothers,
if any one,—either the eldest or the middle or the youngest—should be
deprived of his share at the time of partition—by reason of his having
gone to a foreign country and such other causes—his share does not
disappear; it has to be set aside, and not divided among the
co-parceners.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.211-212)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (17.17).—‘A re-united co-parcener shall take the share of his
re-united co-parcener who has died without issue; and a uterine brother
that of his uterine brother; and they shall give the shares of their
deceased co-parceners and uterine brothers to the sons of the latter.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.138).—‘Between two re-united co-parceners, if one
should die, the other shall take his share; hut in the event of a
posthumous son being born to the former, the living co-parcener shall
make over the dead father’s share to that son. Similarly in the case of
two re-united uterine brothers.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.74-76).—‘When anyone brother should die, or anyhow
renounce worldly interests, his share is not lost; it is allotted to his
uterine brother. If there be a sister, she is entitled to a share of his
property. This is the law regarding the property of one destitute of
issue, and who has left no wife or father. When two co-parceners have
again become united, they shall mutually inherit their property.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 603).—‘Among brothers, if anyone, without
issue, should renounce the world, or die,—the remaining brothers shall
divide among themselves all his property, except the *strīdhana*.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 605).—‘The shares of re-united co-parceners shall
be taken by re-united co-parceners; those of brothers living separately
by those living separately;—in both cases, if there is no wife or other
heir.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रोषितस्य मृतस्य वा भागम् उद्धृत्य ॥ ९.२११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

211	If the eldest or the youngest (brother) is deprived of his share, or if either of them dies, his share is not lost (to his immediate heirs).
</details>
