+++
title = "212 सोदर्या विभजेरंस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

His uterine brothers, coming together, shall divide it equally; as also the united brothers and consanguineous sisters.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सोदर्या भ्रातरो** येषां संसृष्टा अर्थास् ते[^५६०] गृह्णीयुः । **भगिन्यश् च सनाभयः** । सोदर्या अप्रत्तास्[^५६१] ता हि सनाभिव्यपदेश्याः । प्रत्ताः[^५६२] पुनः प्रतिगोत्रभावम् अनुभवन्तीति न भ्रातॄणां सनाभयः । **ये च संसृष्टा** इति । **च**शब्दो भगिनीं समुच्चिनोति । न[^५६३] त्व् इयम् आशङ्का कर्तव्या "सोदर्या गृह्णीयुर् **ये च भ्रातरः संसृष्टा**ः" इति । तथा सत्य् असोदर्याणाम् अपि संसृष्टानां भागः प्रसज्येत । सन्त्य् एव सोदर्या असंसृष्टाः संसृष्टाश् च सोदर्या, यत्र सन्ति तत्रोभयोर् अपि विभागेन विभागं गृह्णीयुः । न चेदं विरुध्येत ।


[^५६३]:
     M G omit: na


[^५६२]:
     M G: pravṛttāḥ


[^५६१]:
     M G: aputrās


[^५६०]:
     M G: yeṣāṃ saṃsṛṣṭārthe; J: yeṣāṃ saṃsṛṣṭorthe; DK: ye ca saṃsṛṣṭās te (my reading is conjectural)

- अन्योदर्यस् तु संसृष्टी नान्योदर्यो धनं हरेत् ।

- असंसृष्टो ऽपि वादद्यात् सोदर्यो नानयमातृकः[^५६४] ॥ ( य्ध् २.१४३)


[^५६४]:
     M G J: nānayamātrikaḥ

अस्यायम् अर्थः । सापत्नो भ्राता सत्य् अपि संसृष्टित्वे न गृह्णाति, यदा सोदर्यो ऽसंसृष्टो ऽपि विद्यते । सोदर्याणां मध्याद् येन संसृष्टः स एव नान्याह्, सत्य् अपि सोदर्यत्वे । तद् उक्तम् "संसृष्टिनस् तु संसृष्टी सोदर्यस्य तु सोदरः" (य्ध् २.१४२) इति । यदा तु सोदरा नैव सन्ति तदा यैर् एव सापत्नैः संसृष्टस् त एव गृह्णीयुर् न त्व् इतरे । नोदर्यविभक्तानां सह वसतां महानिकटम् आवसत्य् अपि सांनिध्यं विशेषकार्यं सामान्योत्थं विभक्तानाम्[^५६५] अपि विज्ञायत इत्य् आहुः । 


[^५६५]:
     M G DK: viśeṣakāryasāmānyotthavibhaktānām

- तेन विभक्तानाम् अप्य् अन्यतरस्मिन् प्रमीते[^५६६] सोदर्य एव गृह्णीयान् नास्य भागः परिलुप्यते । 


[^५६६]:
     M G: anyataraprameyasodarya; J: anyataraprameye sodarya

- न चैतच् चोदनीयम् "नैवास्य तदानीं भाग उत्थितः परिलोपो[^५६७] वा चिन्त्यते" । 


[^५६७]:
     M G J: paraloko

- यत उक्तम्- "समुत्पन्ने वाच्यः स्वामी" इति । "अनीशास् ते हि जीवतोः" (म्ध् ९.१०४) इति ॥ ९.२१२ ॥

_तत्र पुतुर् ऊर्ध्वं समनन्तरम् एव पुत्राणां स्वाम्यं दर्शयति_ ।[^५६८]
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The property shall be taken by those ‘*uterine brothers*’ who may have
been ‘*united*’ with him in property;—also ‘*consanguineous*
*sisters*’—*i.e*., those that are unmarried; it is only these that are
called ‘*consanguineous, sanābhi*’ (which is the term used in the text);
those that are married go over to the ‘family’ of their husbands, and
hence no longer remain ‘consanguineous’ to their brothers.

‘*And those brothers that are united*’.—The particle ‘*ca*,’ ‘and,’
includes the ‘sisters’ also.

This should not he taken to mean that the property shall be taken ‘by
the uterine brothers, and also *by such brothers as may be united*.’ As
in that case those others also who are *not uterine*, but *united*,
would be entitled to a share in the property. Among the *uterine*
brothers, there may he some that are *united* and others that are *not
united*; and where there are *uterine* brothers, united and not united,
it is these that would divide the property among themselves.

Nor would this militate against the following text—‘A brother born of
another mother, even though united, shall not take the property of his
half-brother; while a uterine brother, even though not united, shall
take it, but not the brother born of a different mother.’
(*Yājñavalkya*, 2.139). The meaning of this is as follows:—‘Even though
united, the half-brother does not receive the property, if a uterine
brother is there, even though not united; while among the uterine
brothers, he alone shall receive it who is *united*, and not any other,
notwithstanding his uterine character.’ This is what has been declared
in the text—‘Of one who is united with another brother, this united
brother shall receive the property; and the uterine brother that of
another uterine brother.’ (*Yajñāvalkya*, 2.138). When, however, there
are no *uterine* brothers at all, then the property shall be taken by
such half-brothers as may be united, and none others. Among uterine
brothers, even when separated, there is always some sort of ‘proximity,’
due to their living near one another; so that the function of the
*uterine* brother would, in a general way, be accomplished by even those
that may have separated. Hence it is that, among such uterine brothers
also as may have separated, if one dies, his property shall go to the
other uterine brother, whose share in the property can never totally
disappear.

It would not be right to argue against this that—“at the time in
question the share of the separated brother can never come up at all,
and hence there is nothing that would disappear or not disappear.” Since
it has been declared that ‘the son becomes the owner of the property as
soon as he is born’ (so that the ownership of all brothers over the
ancestral property is innate in them);—but so long as the parents are
alive, they have no mastery over it’ (9.104); which shows that all the
sons acquire ownership immediately after the father’s death.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The share of a deceased or disqualified united brother goes first to the
reunited brothers of the full blood and to such sisters of the full
blood as are not married, next to such brothers of the full blood as had
not been reunited, and finally to the reunited half-brothers (Medhātithi
and Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—first to the reunited full brothers,
secondly to the reunited half brothers, then to the full sisters
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

The said persons inherit the property only on the failure of sons,
wives, daughters and parents (Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nārāyaṇa).

According to Nārāyaṇa what is here said refers to the property of one
who dies before partition; but according to others to that of a reunited
brother only.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.139), which adds the following
explanation:—‘This verse lays down the manner of disposing of the share
set aside in accordance with the preceding verse; which is as
follows:—The uterine brothers shall divide it; *i.e*., it shall be
divided equally among all his uterine brothers, those that were united
with him as well as those not so united and those who may have gone to
foreign lands; they should all come together and divide the said
property equally among themselves;—also those step-brothers who had been
united with him, and his uterine sisters; all these should divide it
equally among themselves.—The *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following
notes:—That the *un-united* full brothers are meant by the first half is
shown by the mention of the ‘united’ in the second half;—that the second
half refers to *half* brothers is shown by the mention of ‘*uterine*’
brothers in the first half;—the half-brothers meant here must be
understood to be of the same caste as the original owner.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 679), which has the following
notes:—The mention of ‘uterine’ in the first half and of ‘brothers,’ in
the second half indicate that the latter stands for *half-brothers*;—the
mention of ‘united’ in the second half, and the omission of it in
connection with the ‘uterine brothers’ indicate that the uterine
brothers meant are those that were *un-united*. Thus then the meaning of
this verse comes to be this:—The property that has been set aside as the
share of the disqualified person, shall be divided equally by his
un-united uterine brothers, who should all—even those who may have gone
to other lands—come together for the division; as also the step-brothers
of the same caste as the original owner, who were united with him, and
also his uterine sisters. All these, beginning from the un-united
uterine brothers and ending with the uterine sisters, should divide the
property equally among themselves. That the half-brothers meant here are
those of the same caste as the owner is shown by the fact that for the
brothers of *different* castes, different shares have been laid down.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 749), which adds the following
explanation—The said share should be taken by those uterine brothers who
were united with the original owner, and not those who were not united,
even though they be his uterine brothers; if there be no *united*
uterine brothers, then it shall be divided among all his uterine
brothers equally—without any inequality due to seniority and so
forth;—if there be no uterine brothers, then it shall go to the uterine
sisters;—and if there be no uterine sisters, then it shall go to the
step-sisters and step-brothers.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 601), which adds the following
notes—‘*Sodary* *āḥ*’ qualifies ‘*bhrātaraḥ*’ (of the second line); so
that the meaning is that among his ‘brothers’ only those will divide the
said property who fulfill the conditions of being both ‘uterine’ and
‘united and also the uterine sisters who are *unmarried*.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 362), which explains
the meaning to be that the said property shall be taken by the
*un-united* uterine brothers, and the *united* half-brothers, and the
uterine sisters,—all coming together, even those who may have gone to
other lands; it being divided among these equally;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 158), as countenancing the view that
brothers, even though uterine, have no share, if they did not live
jointly.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.211-212)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
9.211].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

असंसृष्टाणां सोद]राणांस् तं विभजेरन् न सापत्नाः, सति तु संसर्गे ये संसृष्टास् ते विभजेरन्, न सोदर्या अप्य् असंसृष्टाः ॥ ९.२१२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	His uterine brothers, having assembled together, shall equally divide it, and those brothers who were reunited (with him) and the uterine sisters.
</details>
