+++
title = "219 वस्त्रम् पत्रम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A cloth, a conveyance, an ornament, cooked food, water, women, what is conducive to welfare and pasture-ground,—these they declare to be impartible.—(219)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वस्त्रपत्रालंकारकृतान्नोदकानाम् एकत्वं विवक्षितम् । **पत्रं** वाहनं गन्त्रीशकटादि । **अलंकारः** अङ्गुलीयकादि । **वस्त्रं** सममूल्यम्, न तु महार्घम् । **उदकं** कूपवाप्यादि । **स्त्रियो** दास्यः । **योगक्षेमं** यतो योगे क्षेमो भवति, मन्त्रिपुरोहितामात्यवृद्धाः वास्तु च । चौरादिभ्यस् ततो रक्षा भवति । स्मृत्यन्तरे च पठ्यते- "वास्तुनि विभागो न विद्यते" । **प्रचारं** यत्र गवाश् चरन्ति । प्रवेत्रेत्य् आह[^५८४] । तेन यत् पैतृकेनोक्तं "न ह्य् अत्र धर्मातिक्रमः कश्चिद् अस्ति" इति, तद् अनुपपन्नं दर्सयति । अदृष्टासु हि ते प्रतिषेधाः, तदतिक्रमाद् अधर्मो न स्यात् ॥ ९.२१९ ॥


[^५८४]:
     The reading here appears to be corrupt.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The singular number in ‘cloth,’ ‘conveyance‘ornament,’ and ‘cooked food’
is meant to be significant.

‘*Conveyance*’—vehicle; such as a chariot, a cart and so forth.

‘*Ornament*’—the ring and so forth.

‘*Cloth*’—of ordinary quality, not what is exceptionally valuable.

‘*Water*’—well, tank and so forth.

‘*Women*’—female slaves.

‘*Yogakṣeman*’—what is conducive (‘*kṣema*’) to welfare (‘*yoga*’);
*e.g*., experienced ministers, priests, councillors and so forth. These
are helpful in guarding the household against thieves and others.

In another *Smṛti* it is found that ‘there is no division of the
dwelling-house.’

‘*Pasture-ground*’—where the cattle graze.

From what is declared here it would follow that it is not absolutely
true that there is nothing wrong in dividing what has been left by the
father. But this denial is of that kind of which a transgression
involves no sin. (?)—(219)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Striyaḥ*’—‘Female slaves’ (Medhātithi);—‘wives’ (Nārāyaṇa).

(*a*) ‘*Yogakṣemam* (*b*) *pracāram*’.—(*a*) ‘agencies securing
protection; such as councillors, parents, old ministers, who protect
people against thieves; (*b*) pasture land’ (Medhātithi, who is badly
misrepresented by Buhler; Kullūka and Raghāvānanda);—(*a*) ‘means of
gain, *e.g*., a royal grant, and means of protection (*b*) and roads’
(Nārāyaṇa);—(*a*) sources of gain, persons for whom one sacrifices, and
means of protection, (*b*) path leading to fields.’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 685), which adds the
following notes—Only those clothes are impartible which are worn
;—‘*patram*,’ conveyances, *e.g*., horses, palanquins and so forth; of
these also those are not to be divided which have been in the constant
use of any one exclusively;—or ‘*patra*’ may be taken as ‘property
consisting of a written document’;—in *Dāyakrama-saṅgraha* (p. 37);—and
in *Vīra* *mitvodaya* (Vyavahāra 221a), which explains ‘*patram*’ as
*conveyance*.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.118) as describing property that cannot
be partitioned;—it goes on to add that of clothes those only are
impartible which have been worn by some one; the clothes that were worn
by the father should, on bis death, be given away to persons fed at his
*Śrāddha*. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that the view of Medhātithi and
*Kalpataru*—that valuable clothes are not included here—is to be
rejected

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 725), which adds that the explanation by
some people of ‘*patram*’ as *conveyance* is opposed to the text of
Kātyāyana, by which the word stands for ‘property entered in a written
document.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 504), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Patram*’ is ‘property entered in a written document,’ as is
clear from the texts of Kātyāyana; though *Halāyudha* has explained it
to mean ‘conveyance’;—‘*Kṛtānnam*,’ flour and rice, says the
*Pārijāta*;—‘*Striyāḥ*,’ those that are ‘*Samyukta*,’ ‘attached to,’ any
one in particular;—‘*Yogakṣemam*’ stands for ministers and priests who
are the agents of protection;—‘*Pracārāḥ*,’ paths for the passing of
cattle;—*Halāyudha* has explained ‘*Yoga*’ as ‘boats and such things’
and ‘*Kṣema*’ as ‘forts and such means of safety.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 380), which has the
following notes—‘Clothes’ that are worn;—the clothes worn by the father
should, on his death, be given away to the persons fed at his *Śrāddha*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (18.44).—‘Apparel, vehicles, and ornaments, prepared food,
water, females, property set apart for pious purposes or for sacrifices,
a common pasture-ground and document (or books) are impartible.’

*Gautama* (28.46-47).—‘Water, property set apart for pious uses or for
sacrifices, and prepared food shall not be divided;—nor women already
connected.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 503).—‘There shall he no division
of the dwelling house, or of water-vessels, ornaments, employed women,
clothes, or water-drains,—so says Prajāpati.’

*Vyāsa* (Do., pp. 504-505).—‘Persons for whom one officiates at
sacrifices, agricultural holdings, conveyance, prepared food, water, and
woman are impartible.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., pp. 504-505).—‘Property that has been set apart by
means of a document for religious purposes, water, wives, hereditary
mortgage (*nibandha*?), clothes and ornaments that have been worn,
articles whose division is impossible, pasture-ground, paths,—these
should not be divided.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.79-85).—‘Those by whom clothes and the like articles
have been declared to he impartible have not taken into consideration
the fact that the wealth of the rich is based upon clothes and
ornaments;—such wealth, when withheld from partition, will yield no
profit; but it cannot be allotted to a single co-parcener. Therefore it
has to be divided with some skill, or else it would be useless.—Clothes
and ornaments are to be divided after selling them (and distributing the
proceeds); a written bond is divided after recovering the amount
involved; prepared food is divided by means of exchange with unprepared
food.—The water of a well or a pool shall be drawn and used according to
need. A single female slave shall be successively made to work at the
houses of the several co-sharers, according to their respective
shares.—If there are many such slaves, they shall be divided equally.
The same rule applies to male slaves also. Property obtained for a pious
purpose shall he divided in equal shares.—Fields and embankments shall
he divided according to the several shares. A common road or
pasture-ground shall be always used by the co-sharers in due proportion
to their several shares.—The clothes, ornaments, bed and the like, as
well as conveyances and such things—appertaining to the father—shall he
given to the person who pertakes of his funeral repast, after honouring
him with fragrant drugs and flowers.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतान् अपीच्छया विभजेतन् । "नाकामो दातुम् अर्हति" इत्य् एतद् अनुवादो ऽयं द्रष्टव्यः । सर्वत्रैवेच्छातो दानम् अयुक्तं प्रतिषेद्धुम् । सर्वत्र धनविभागे प्राप्ते- **वस्त्रं** [प्रसिद्धम् । **पत्रं**] पतत्य् अनेनेत्य् अश्वादिः । **अलंकारं** सामर्थ्यात् पितरि जीवति यद् येन परिगृहीतम् । **कृतान्नं** तण्डुलादि । **उदकं** तदाधारकूपादिः । **स्त्रियः** उपभोगदास्यः प्रतिनियताः । **योगक्षेमप्रचारं च** येन द्रव्येण योगक्षेमर्थं पर्चरन्ति । **योगो** ऽनुपात्तपरिलाभः, **क्षेमम्** उपात्तपरिपालनम् । **योगक्षेमं** वा तदर्थं राज्ञापि दीयमानं द्रष्टव्यम् । **प्रचारं च** प्रचरणभूमिजम् इन्धनकादि, **न विभाज्यं प्रचक्षते** ॥ ९.२१९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

219	A dress, a vehicle, ornaments, cooked food, water, and female (slaves), property destined for pious uses or sacrifices, and a pasture-ground, they declare to be indivisible.
</details>
