+++
title = "261 तान् विदित्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having discovered them through well-behaved and disguised men following the same occupations, as also through spies variously disguised, he shall exterminate them and bring them under his control.—(261)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तत्कर्मकारिभिः**[^६८५] तुल्यकर्मकारिभिर् विद्यापूर्वं ये तत्कर्म कृतवन्तः । अथ वा संप्रत्य् एव तत्कर्म कार्यन्ते अन्तर्भावसिद्ध्यर्थं लब्धान्तरा आगत्य कथयिष्यन्ति[^६८६] । तथान्यैर्[^६८७] अपि **चारैः**[^६८८]** अनेकसंस्थानैः** ॥ ९.२६१ ॥


[^६८८]:
     M G J add: tatkarmakāribhir


[^६८७]:
     M G J: tathādyair


[^६८६]:
     M G place this passage at the end of the previous verse: nigūḍhacāraṇas tulyakarmakāribhir . . . kathayiṣyanti


[^६८५]:
     M G J omit: tatkarmakāribhiḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Those following the same occupations*.’—Persons who may have been
addicted to ‘robbery’ etc., in the past, or who may he asked to do it
even at the present time, with a view to become included in the gang and
thereby learn their secrets and report them to the King; and also
through spies variously disguised.—(261)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Protsādya*’.—Nārāyaṇa and Govindarāja read ‘*protsāhya*’ and explain
it as ‘causing them to be instigated’;—Rāghavānanda, who adopts the same
reading, explains it as “having inspired them with energy, by saying
‘you must give up this livelihood and earn money by agriculture, trade
and other lawful means’.”

‘*Anekasaṃsthānaiḥ*’.—‘Wearing various disguises’ (Nārāyaṇa and
Nandana);—‘stationed in various places’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 293).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 9.261-263)  
**

*Kāmandaka* (6.10-13).—‘A monarch having adequately determined the guilt
of the wicked persons who have incurred public displeasure, should do
away with them without the least delay, by underhand measures. The King
should invite the offender to meet him in a secret chamber; when the man
has entered the chamber, he should be followed by certain menials with
arms hidden about their person, who had been previously instructed.
Thereupon the royal door-keepers would enter and under the pretence of
suspecting them, should search their persons; and finding the hidden
arms openly accuse the offender with having hired these men for
assassinating the King. In this manner, imputing crimes to the
offenders, the King shall, for the satisfaction of his subjects, weed
out the thorns from his realm.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 135).—‘Spies disguised as ascetics, renunciates,
mendicants, bards and so forth should be employed by the King to find
out the wickedness or otherwise of the people and the King’s officers.
If there is any one whom he suspects of dishonest ways of life, the King
shall have him shadowed by a man of the same caste; when this latter has
won the man’s confidence,—who for example is a judge—he should address
him these words—“Such and such a relation of mine has been accused of an
offence, do please save him from the danger, and here accept this money
for the purpose.” If the judge falls into the trap and accepts the
bribe, he should be banished by the King as one addicted to dishonesty.’

*Brhaṣpati* (22.6).—‘Thieves or robbers, having been found out by the
King’s servants, either by associating with them, or through marks of
their criminality, or by their possessing the stolen goods, they shall
be compelled to restore the plunder and shall be visited with
punishments ordained by the law.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 293).—‘Having found out the thieves and
robbers through clever spies conversant with the methods adopted by
criminals, the King shall follow them up and have them arrested by
secretly instructed spies.’

Do. (Theft: 61).—‘As governor, the King shall extirpate the evil-doers,
after having traced them by the application of cunning stratagems and
arrested them.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

261	Having detected them by means of trustworthy persons, who, disguising themselves, (pretend) to follow the same occupations and by means of spies, wearing various disguises, he must cause them to be instigated (to commit offences), and bring them into his power.
</details>
