+++
title = "15 कर्म ब्रह्मोद्भवम्"

+++
3.14-15 Annat etc. Karma etc. The things, that are born and are of
diversified nature, arise from the food viz , the one which is of the
nature of being undifferentiated objct of enjoyment, and which is
somehow called by different synonyms like maya, vidya, kala etc. The
said food also \[arises\] from the 'rain-cloud' i.e., the Self, which is
of the nature of uninterrupted Consciousness. For, the state of being an
object of enjoyment gains its existence depending on the enjoyer. That
'rain-cloud' too viz., the enjoyer, \[arises\] from the sacrifice
(yajna) i.e., the act of enjoying. For, the state of being an enjoyer
depends on the act of enjoying. And the act of enjoying \[arises\] from
action, i.e., from the strength of freedom of action-energy (freedom in
assuming any and every from). The said freedom also, though it is
uninterrupted, \[arises\] due to the good touch of the Brahman Which is
full of freedom and of forms that are conditioned and are many, (or
which is full of freedom and of many forms and is not conditioned); and
which is the Supreme Soul, Brahman assuming the beings (tattvas), viz.,
the mighty Isvara (or Mahesvara) \[and the Sadasiva\] skipping high on
It (Brahman). That Brahman, having the rising Lord-ship (or might) that
is pure and unvieled, arises from what does not stream forth viz., the
pure Supreme Consciousness in which the entire waves of might and
Lordship have totally calmed down. Thus, the sacrifice well established
\[as an exil\] in this manner, causing a six spoked wheel to rotate ,
spins the \[two-fold\] yarns - the yarn of emancipation by employing
that part fitted with three spokes, and the yarn of \[birth-and-death\]
activity by looming with the part of the \[other\] three spokes. Thus,
the Brahman Which is charming with rolling waves of wisdom and
ignorance, is established on nothing but the sacrifice. But certain
other commentators \[interpret the passage as \] : The food is indeed
the cause of beings through its graded chages into semen verile and
blood; the food arises from the rain-cloud through the rains; that rains
too arises from the \[Vedic\] sacrifice according to the principle :
'The oblation offered into the \[sacrificial\] fire, pro- perly reaches
the sun etc. (Manu. III, 76). The sacrifice \[arises\] from the action;
the action follows the knowledge, and the knowledge is from the
Imperishable. Still others \[explain\] differently : The food that is
being enjoyed is the pentad of sense-objects; depending on it, the
bhutas (elements) i.e., the sense-organs, act; the objects are of the
nature of the sparkles of the Self. Therefore, it is only the Self that
is being nourished by enjoying sense-objects. Hence the all-pervading
Brahman is established in action. For It is identical with that.
