+++
title = "002 वेदान् अधीत्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having learnt, in due course, three Vedas, or two Vedas, or one Veda, he should enter upon the state of the householder, having never deviated from the vows of studentship.—(2).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

त्रैवेदिकम् अध्ययनम् उक्तम् । एकद्विवेदाध्ययनम् अप्राप्तं विकल्प्यते । वेदशब्दः शाखावचनो व्याख्यातः । तिस्रः शाखा अधीयीत द्वे एकां वैकैकस्माद् वेदान् न त्व् एकस्माद् एव । त्रयी त्रिविद्येति पठ्यते । 

- **अधीत्य** गृहीत्वा **वेदम्** उक्तया व्रतचर्यया । **गृहस्थाश्रमम् आवसेत्** । गृहस्थाश्रमस्य स्वरूपं वक्ष्यति "उद्वहेत द्विजो भार्याम्" (म्ध् ३.४) इत्यादि । **आवसेद्** अनुतिष्ठेत् । अनेकार्था धातवः । आङ् मर्यादायां वर्तते[^२२] । कृतदारपरिग्रहो रूढ्या गृहस्थ उच्यते । गृहशब्दो दारवचनस् तत्र तिष्ठति । तस्य यो विहितः पदार्थसमूहो विधिनिषेधात्मकः स आश्रमशब्देनोच्यते । यथोपनीतस्य ब्रह्मचर्याश्रम आ समावर्तनात्, कृतविवाहस्य गार्हस्थ्यम् इति । 


[^२२]:
     M G 1st ed. place this sentence after "tatra tiṣṭhati"

- अविप्लुतम् अखण्डितं ब्रह्मचर्यं स्त्रीसंप्रयोगनिवृत्तिर् यस्य स एवम् उच्यते । वाक्यभेदश् चात्र द्रष्टव्यः । आख्यातव्यवहारेण- **आविप्लुतब्रह्मचर्यो** भवेद् **गृहस्थाश्रमं** च प्रतिपद्यते । एकवाक्यतायां कदाचन विप्लवे गार्हस्थ्याधिकार एव हीयेत । अद्य पुनः पुरुषार्थतया विधानेन तदतिक्रमे प्रायश्चित्तेन युज्यते, न त्व् अधिकारी न[^२३] भवति ।


[^२३]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na

- अधीत्यावसेद् इति च पौर्वापर्यमात्रं विवक्षितम्, नाध्ययनसमनन्तरभाविता विवाहस्य ल्यप्कार्यात्[^२४] पौर्वापर्यविधानाद् आनन्तर्यं न शब्दार्थः । अतश् च स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविवाहयोर् अन्तराले व्याकरणादिशास्त्रश्रवणं वेदार्थज्ञानार्थं लभ्यते । विद्वान् एव हि गार्हस्थ्ये ऽधिक्रियते, न यथाध्ययनविधौ[^२५] मूर्खः । यद्य् अपि बाल्यावस्थायां तिर्यक्समानधर्मा स्वम् अधिकारं प्रतिपत्तुम् असमर्थस् तथापि पित्राचार्येण वानुष्ठाप्यते । वस्तुतस् तयोर् एवाधिकारः । अपत्यानुशासने पितुर् अधिकारो ऽपत्योत्पत्तिविधेस्[^२६] तावताभिनिर्वर्त्यत्वात् । अनुशासनं च विधिनिषेधाधिकारद्वयप्रतिपादनम् । तत्र यत् प्रतिपाद्य्मानो ऽपि नावबुध्यते, तद् अन्ध इव हस्तग्राहिकया कार्यते । यथाग्निसंस्पर्शकूपादिपाताद् गाढहस्तावष्टम्भादिना[^२७] धार्यते, एवम् अदृष्टाद् अपि मद्यपानादेः । यथा वानिच्छन्न् औषधापानादौ[^२८] प्रवर्तते एवं शास्त्रीयेष्व् अपि पदार्थेषु । यदा त्व् ईषद्व्युत्पन्नस् तदैवं नियुज्येत[^२९] "इदम् इदं कर्तुम् अर्हसि" इति । एवं सत्य् अधीतवेदो माणवकः पित्राचार्येणैवैवं प्रतिबोध्यितव्यो "गृहीतवान् असि वेदं त्वम् इदानीं तदर्थजिज्ञासायाम् अधिक्रियसे ततस् तदङ्गानि श्रोतुम् अरहसि" इति । एतावता पितुर् अपत्योत्पादनाधिकारनिवृत्तिः । तद् उक्तं "कियता पुनर् उत्पादितो भवति यावता स्वयम् अधिगतकृत्यो भवति" इति । 


[^२९]:
     M G 1st ed.: niyujyata


[^२८]:
     M G: auṣadhādānādau


[^२७]:
     M G: -ṣṭambho


[^२६]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vidhau


[^२५]:
     M G 1st ed.: yathā nādhyayanavidhau


[^२४]:
     M G 1st ed.: yatkāryāt

- अतः स्थितम् एतत्- नाधीत्यैव विवाहो यावद् वेदार्थो नाधिगतः । एवं च पदयोजना कर्तव्या । **अधीत्य** अध्ययने निवृत्ते ऽप्य् **अविप्लुतब्रह्मचर्यः** स्यात् । प्राप्तायां च निवृत्तौ पुनर्वचनं नियमान्तराणां मधुमांसवर्जनादीनां निवृत्तिपरम् । तेन यावद् अध्ययनं तावत् सर्वे नियमा अनुष्ठातव्याः । समाप्ते त्व् अध्ययने ऽर्थावबोध्काले स्त्रीनिवृत्तिर् एव करणीया, स्त्रीसेवा न विधातव्या[^३०] । ब्रह्मचर्यशब्दो यद्य् अपि ब्रह्मग्रहणार्थं यद्व्रतग्रहणं तत्र व्युत्पाद्यते तथापि स्त्रीनिवृत्तिपर एवास्य तत्र प्रयोग इति दर्शयिष्यामः । 


[^३०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: karaṇīyā, strīsevā na vidhātavyā

- **यथाक्रमम्** । य एवाध्येतॄणां पाठक्रमः प्रसिद्धस् तेनैव, प्रथमं चतुःषष्टिस् ततो ब्राह्मणं पितृपितामहाद्यभिजनप्रबन्धोपक्रमं भवति । न हीदृशे ऽर्थे वक्तारो न कुलेन न शीलेन न क्रमेणेति । एतेन चैतत् प्रतिपादितं भवति- या एव पित्रादिभिः शाखाधीता सा[^३१] न त्याज्येति ॥ ३.२ ॥


[^३१]:
     M G 1st ed.: sāpi
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘learning of Three Vedas’ has been mentioned (in the preceding
verse); the learning of ‘two’ and ‘one’ Veda, not having been mentioned
anywhere, are here put forward us alternatives. The term ‘*veda*’ in
this connection has been explained as standing for Recensional Text;
‘and what is meant is that one should learn three, or two, or one
Recension of each of the three Vedas,—and not that three or two or one
Recension of a single Veda should be learnt. Because the work to be
learnt has been called the ‘Triplicate Science.’

‘*Having learnt*’—having got up, by means of the above described course
of studentship.

‘*He should enter upon the state of the householder*’—The exact nature
of;the ‘Householder’s stage’ is going to be described later on (Verse 4,
below).—‘*Enter*,’ *i.e*., live; verbal roots having several meanings.
The prefix ‘ā’ denotes limit.

One who has taken a wife to himself is called ‘householder,’ which term
is used in its conventional, not etymological, sense; The term ‘house’
standing for *wife*; and he who *takes his stand upon that house* is
called ‘Householder.’

The term ‘*āśrama*,’ ‘*state*,’ stands for all those duties, positive
and negative, that have been prescribed (for the married man). Just as
for the ‘initiated boy,’ there is ‘state of studentship’ till the Final
Return from the Preceptor’s house, so for one who has married, it is the
‘state of the Householder,’

‘*Nor deviated from the votes of studentship*,’—*i.e*., he who has not
broken the vows of not having intercourse with women. This epithet has
to be regarded as a distinct sentence, in accordance with the usage of
stories; the sense being that (*a*) ‘the boy should not deviate from the
vows of studentship’ and (*b*) ‘he should enter upon the state of the
Householder.’ If the whole were taken as a single sentence, then, as a
result of this, one who has deviated from the vows would never be
entitled at all to enter upon the Householder’s state. If, however, we
take the epithet as an independent injunction pat forth for the man’s
benefit (and not as a necessary condition for entering upon
Householdership), then deviation from it makes the man liable to the
penalty of expiation, but it does not make him unfit to enter upon
Householdership.

By the words, ‘*having learnt, he should enter*,’ all that is meant is
that the two acts should come in this order,—entrance upon
Householdership following the ‘learning;’ and it is not meant that
marriage should come immediately after study. Because where the words
signify mere sequence, immediate sequence is not always meant. Hence
daring the time intervening between ‘Vedic Study’ and ‘marriage,’ it
becomes possible for the boy to carry on the study of Grammar and. other
Sciences, which help in the understanding of the meaning of Vedic texts.
In fact, it is only the learned man that is entitled to Householdership;
and it is not like the ‘Vedic Study,’ to which the entirely ignorant boy
is entitled. Though during boyhood, the boy is like a lower animal,
incapable of understanding what he is entitled to, yet he is made to act
either by his Father or by his Preceptor. In fact, the act of ‘Vedic
Study’ by the boy falls within the Father’s province; the
proper-teaching of the child being the Father’s duty; and the reason for
this lies in the fact that it is only when the child has been properly
taught that the Father is regarded as having duly fulfilled the
injunction of ‘begetting a child.’ ‘Teaching’ of the child, again,
consists in explaining to him what he should do and what he should not
do. And, if the Boy fails to understand his duties when these are
explained to him, he is led by the hand, like the blind man, and made to
fulfil them; just as he is caught firmly by the hand and saved from
falling into the fire or into the well, in the same manner, he is also
saved from drinking and other evils leading to imperceptible effects.
Or, again, just as a boy is made, against his wish, to drink a wholesome
medicine, so in the same manner, he is also made to do acts prescribed
in the scriptures. After he has become capable of understanding things a
little, he is directed by means of such words ‘you should do such and
such an act.’ Such being the case, when the Boy has learnt the Veda, he
should be instructed by his Father or Preceptor in such words as—‘You
have learnt the Veda, now you are fit for carrying on an investigation
into what is contained in it,—hence you should now hear lectures on the
subsidiary sciences.’ It is only when this advice has been given that
the father is regarded as having fulfilled the duty of ‘begetting a
child’; as it has been declared—‘the child is begotten only when he
comes to understand his own duties.’

From all this it becomes established that one should not marry
immediately after learning the Veda, until he has learnt what is
contained in the Veda; and the words of the text have to be construed
thus—‘Having learnt—*i.e*., after learning has been finished—one should
continue to be firm in the vows of studentship (*i.e*., ‘of
continence’). The cessation of continence having become permissible
(after the Veda has been learnt), its maintenance is reiterated with a
view to indicate that the other vows and restraints—such as the
avoidance of honey, meat and the rest—may be withdrawn. The conclusion
thus comes to be that, so long as the Veda is being learnt, the Boy
should keep all his vows of studentship,—but when the learning of the
Veda has been completed, and he continues his studies further for under
standing what is contained in the Veda, he should abstain only from
intercourse with women.

Though the term ‘*brahmacharya*,’ ‘*vows of studentship*,’ is ordinarily
explained as standing for those observances and restraints that are kept
up for the proper learning of the Veda,—yet in the present context it
has been used in the sense of ‘avoiding intercourse with women,’—as we
shall show later on.

‘*In due course*,’—*i.e*., according to that order of reading which is
well known among students; *i.e*. first of all one should read the
sixty-four sections of the Saṃhitā (of the Ṛgveda), then the Brāhmaṇa,
and so forth, in the same order of sequence in which they may have been
studied by his forefathers. In matters like this, no one can rightly say
that ‘one should not follow either family traditions, or the dictates of
morality, or orderly sequence.’ The meaning of all this is that ‘one
should not abandon that Recensional Text which may have been learnt by
his father and other ancestors.’—(2)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 189, 1. 14)—‘*Vedaśabdaḥ śākhāvacano
vyākhyātaḥ*’—Hopkins calls this ‘a later view’ and refers to Āpastamba
2. 6.5.

The first quarter of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on p. 24, l.
36), in amplification of Yājñavalkya’s statement that ‘Studentship is to
extend over twelve years’, and the meaning is deduced that twelve years
should be devoted to the study of each Veda.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 131);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 505), where the note is added that—‘If one
intends to perform the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and such other sacrifices, which can
be performed only with the help of the three Vedas, one has to learn all
the three Vedas, the Ṛk, Yajuṣ and Sāman;—if he is going to perform the
*Prākṣaumika* and the *Haviryajñas*, he has to learn only, two, the Ṛk
and the Yajuṣ;—while if he intends to perform only the *Pākayajñas*, he
should learn only his own hereditary rescensional Vedic text; in the
case of the other Vedas also, he should confine himself to only those
rescensions which may have been studied by his forefathers, and not any
one at random.

The verse is also quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 587) in support of the
view that every Brāhmaṇa is entitled to the study of various Vedic
rescensional texts;—in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 680); in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*
(p. 568);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 49a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (3. 52).—‘Having unfailingly maintained his studentship,
he shall marry a girl endowed with good qualities.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

002	(A student) who has studied in due order the three Vedas, or two, or even one only, without breaking the (rules of) studentship, shall enter the order of householders.
</details>
