+++
title = "003 हरम् पितुः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When, by the due observance of his duties, he has acquired the Veda and his heritage from his father, and is so inclined,—his father shall first honour him, adorned with garlands and seated upon a couch, with the “Cow.”—(3)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तं **ब्रह्मदायहरं** **प्रथमं गवार्हयेत्** । ब्रह्म च दायश् च ते उभे हरति स्वीकरोतीति **ब्रह्मदायहरः** । दीयत इति **दायो** धनं, **ब्रह्म** वेदो, **हरणं** अधिगमः । गृहीतवेदः पित्रा कृतविभागो गार्हस्थ्यं प्रतिपद्यते, निर्धनस्यानधिकारात् । यदि तु पिता निर्धनस् तदा सांतानिकतया धनम् अर्जयित्वा विवाहयेत् ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु ब्रह्मैव दायो ब्रह्मदाय इति पूर्वोकविध्यनुवादं मन्यन्ते पितुर् इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाचार्यस्य माणवकाध्यापने ऽधिकार उक्तः किम् इदम् उच्यते **पितुर् ब्रह्मदायहरम्** इति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । यस्य पिता विद्यते तस्य स एवाचार्यः । अभावे पितुर् अशक्तौ वान्यस्याधिकारः । आचार्यान्तरोपादानेन पितुर् अधिकारो निवर्तत एव । स्वयं वाध्यापयत्व् अन्योपादानेन वेति न विशेषः । 

- <u>यद्</u> अप्य् आहुः- वरो दक्षिणेत्य् उपनयने नित्यवद् दक्षिणाम्नानात् परकर्तृकत्वम् एवेति ।

- <u>तद् असत्</u> । उपनयने[^३२] ह्य् अयं विधिः "वरो दक्षिणा" इति । उपनेता च पिता वाचार्यो वा, तौ द्वाव् अपि स्वाधिकारप्रवृत्तौ नानत्यन्तरम् अपेक्षेते । आनमनार्थं हि दक्षिणादानम् । न चाधिकारान्तरतः प्रवृत्तस्यानतिर् उपयुज्यते । तेनायं दक्षिणाशब्द आनमनार्थाभावाद् अर्थाद् धिरण्यदानवद् अदृष्टार्थदानोपलक्षणार्थो विज्ञेयः । पित्रैव चासौ तावता धनेन स्वामी कर्तव्यो येन वरदानम् अस्य संपद्यते । 


[^३२]:
     M G 1st ed.: upanayanasya

- <u>अथायम्</u> आग्रहः- नानत्यर्थाद् दानाद् ऋते दक्षिणाशब्दस्योपपत्तिः । न वा मुख्ये सति लक्षणा न्यायेति । 

- <u>एवं तर्हि</u> यस्य पिता न तत्स्थानीयो नाचार्यः स यदात्मानम् उपनयेत् सत्यकामवत् तद्विषयो दक्षिणाविधिर् भविष्यति । तस्यापि चेषदपेतशैशवस्यात्मसंस्कारायास्त्येवाधिकार इति प्रतिपादितम् । 

- तस्माद् उभयथा पितुर् अधिकारः, स्वयम् उपनयमानस्यान्यम् आचार्यम् उपाददानस्य वा ।

- **प्रतीतम्** अभिमुखीभूतं गृहाश्रमप्रतिपत्तौ । न तु नैष्ठिकम्, समाप्ताध्ययनविध्यर्थम् अपि ग्रामप्रतिपत्तौ । **स्रग्विणम्** । यावन्तः केचन गृह्यकारैर् मधुपर्ककर्मणि धर्मा आम्नातास् तेषां प्रदर्शनार्थम् एतत् । **तल्प आसीनं** महार्हपर्यङ्कशयनोपविष्टम् । पूजाधिकारार्हं शयानम्[^३३] । **गवा** मधुपर्केण । मधुपर्के ऽसौ विधिः पाक्षिक आम्नातः । अतो गोशब्देन तत्साधनकर्मविशेषो लक्ष्यते । **अर्हयेत्** पूजयेत् । अधिकारात् पिताचार्यो वा । **प्रथमं** पूर्वं विवाहात्[^३४] । **प्रतीतं स्वधर्मेणेत्य्** अनुवादः । स्वधर्मेण ब्रह्मदायहरम्, स्वधर्मेण चार्हयेद् इति संबन्धे न विशेषः ॥ ३.३ ॥


[^३४]:
     M G: pūrvavivāhāt


[^३३]:
     M G 1st ed. place pūjādhikārārhaṃ śayānam after vivāhāt
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*When he has acquired the Veda and his heritage, the father shall
honour him first with the cow*,’ He who has acquired both, the Veda
(‘*Brahman*’) and the heritage (‘*dāya*’) is called
‘*brahmadāyādāharaḥ*.’ ‘*Dāya*’ (Heritage) is *what is given*, *i.e*.,
*property*;—‘*Brahman*’ is ‘*Veda*’;—‘*haraṇa*’ is *acquiring*. It is
only when the boy has learnt the Veda and received his share of the
ancestral property from his father that he takes to the Householder’s
state; a man without any property not being entitled to enter upon that
stage. If the father happens to have no property, he should earn wealth
by begging for the avowed purpose of marrying his son (and thereby
maintaining his line), and then marry him.

Others explain the *Veda* itself as being the ‘heritage;’ and regard the
present verse as a reiteration of the foregoing Injunction! for the
purpose of indicating that it is to be learnt from the Father.

“It having been declared before that it is the Preceptor whose function
it is to teach the Veda, why is it that the boy is now spoken of as
acquiring the Veda and ‘heritage’ *from his father?*”

The answer to this is as follows:—For him whose Father is living, the
Father himself is the ‘Preceptor.’ It is only when the Father is not
living, or when he is somehow incapacitated, that another person may act
as the ‘Preceptor.’ By the appointing of another man as the ‘Preceptor,’
the Father’s title to act as one ceases. But, whether the Father himself
teaches his son or some one else teaches him, it makes no difference.

Some people have urged the following argument—“In connection with the
Upanayana, it has been laid down, as a compulsory duty that the ‘gift
should consist of some very superior thing’ (Gautama, 25.6); from which
it is dear that the function is to be performed by some one else (and
not by the Father himself).”

This is not right. That the Fee should consist of a very superior thing
is an Injunction in connection with the Upanayana, the Initiatory Rite;
and whether the Initiator is the Father or some other Preceptor, neither
of these persons requires any incentive to perform this function; and
fees are paid only as incentives to service; nor is any incentive
necessary in a case where the person engages in the work under the
influence of some other form of prompting. For these reasons, the term
‘Fee’ in the context in question, being found incapable of conveying the
sense of *an incentive to work*, must be taken as standing for some such
gift as is made for the purpose of some transcendental results, just
like the giving of gold. And it is the Father who should make the Boy
the owner of enough wealth to enable him to make a gift of the ‘superior
thing.’

If one were to insist upon the following argument—“it is not possible
for the term *fee* to be used in any sense other than what is paid as an
incentive to serve, and so long as a word can be taken in its primary
sense, it cannot be right to have recourse to any secondary
signification,”—then, in that case, the said Injunction of the Fee will
have to be regarded as applying to such cases where, as in the case of
Satyakāma Jābāla, neither the Father is alive, nor is there any other
Preceptor appointed as the Father’s substitute, and where the Boy
presents himself (to a Teacher) for Initiation. And it has been already
explained that such a boy, having passed his childhood, is fully
entitled to have his sacraments performed for himself.

Thus, in both cases, it is the Father’s function; he may do the
initiating himself or get it done by another Preceptor.

‘*Inclined*’—*i.e*., who is inclined towards entering the life of the
Householder,—and not him who is going to be a lifelong student, even
though the latter may be returning home simply for the sake of obeying
the rule regarding the completion of study.

‘*Adorned with garland*’—this is meant to include all the details that
have been laid down by the authors of the *Gṛhyasūtras* in connection
with the ‘*Madhuparka*’ offering.

‘*Seated upon a couch*’—seated upon a valuable sofa.

‘*With the cow*’—*i.e*., with the ‘*Madhuparka*’ offering. The offering
of the cow in the ‘*Madhuparka*’ has been prescribed as an optional
alternative; hence the term ‘cow’ here stands for that particular act
(of *offering*) which is done by means of the cow.

‘*Shall honour*’—this is the duty of the Father or the Preceptor.

‘*First*’—*i.e*., before marriage.

‘*Inclined*’—*i.e*., lying down upon the couch for the purpose of
receiving the offering.

‘*By* *the strict* *observance of his duties*’—this is a super-fluous
reiteration; and it makes no difference whether it is construed with
‘acquiring the Veda and his heritage,’ or with ‘shall honour.’—(3).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 190, 1. 21)—‘*Sāntānikatayā*’—Apte explains
‘*sāntānika*’ as ‘a Brāhmaṇa who wishes to marry for the sake of issue.’
This is not quite correct. The word occurs in Manu 11. 1, where Kullūka
explains it as ‘*vivāhārthi*,’ which has apparently misled the
lexicographer. The word really means ‘he who is desirous of *santāna*,
propagation of his race’, and is applied to the Father who, if poor, has
to beg for the purpose of marrying *his son*.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 76), which adds the following
explanation: When the Accomplished Student has been understood
(*pratīta*) as inclined to take a wife;—he being
‘*brahmadāyahara*’—*i.e*., equipped with study of the Veda, and
inherited property, *i.e*., being quite able to maintain a family;—if
the father be devoid of property, he should acquire enough by means of
begging, and then marry; and thus obtain the ‘domestic fire,’ without
which he could not perform the *Pākayajñas*.—‘*Sragvin*’ indicates the
presence of ornaments;—‘*talpa*’ is *bedstead*; when the young man is
seated upon it his father ‘should worship him first with the
*cow*’—*i.e*., with the *Madhuparka*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 24. 2).—‘When, an Accomplished Student
arrives, one should offer him the honey-mixture.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 9. 3).—‘Where people are going to worship
him (the next morning), there he should, stay during the night.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 4. 28. 33).—‘Having approached the Ācārya
seated in his assembly, he shall look upon the assembly,—sitting down,
he shall control his breath;—then the Ācārya shall worship him;—having
brought over a chariot yoked with a pair of bullocks...;—he is to ascend
the chariot;—starting either eastward or northward, he is to go round.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2. 8. 4. 5).—‘The Vedic Student deserves the
Cow-honey-mixture;—as also the Ācārya, the Priest, the Accomplished
Student, the King endowed with righteousness.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

003	He who is famous for (the strict performance of) his duties and has received his heritage, the Veda, from his father, shall be honoured, sitting on a couch and adorned with a garland, with (the present of) a cow (and the honey-mixture).
</details>
