+++
title = "004 गुरुणानुमतः स्नात्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-born person, having, on being permitted by the Preceptor, “bathed” and “returned” according to rule, shall take a wife of the same caste as himself, who is endowed with signs.—(4).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्याम् अपि वेदव्रतसमाप्तौ **गुरुणानुमतः** अभ्यनुज्ञातः **स्नायात्** । स्नानशब्देन गृह्योक्तसंस्कारविशेषो लक्ष्यते, ब्रह्मचारिधर्मावधिः । यथा चात्र लक्षणा तथा प्राग् व्याख्यातम् । तद् अहर् एव गृह्यकारोक्तं कंचिन्[^३५] मधुपर्कपूजाविहितसंस्कारं प्राप्य **समावृत्तो** गुरुकुलात् पितृगृहं प्रत्यागत इत्य् अनुवादः । **उद्वहेतेत्य्** एतद्विधिशेषम् एतत् सर्वं प्राप्तम् एव न तु समावर्तनं विवाहाङ्गम् । तेन यः पितृगृह एवाधीतवेदस् तस्य समावृत्त्यसंभवे ऽपि भवत्य् एव विवाहः[^३६] ।


[^३६]:
     M G 1st ed.: samāvṛttasya saṃbhavaty eva vivāhaḥ; G 2nd ed.: asamāvṛttasya saṃbhavaty eva vivāhaḥ


[^३५]:
     M G 1st ed.: kaścin

- <u>केचित्</u> समावर्तनं विवाहाङ्गं स्नानं मन्यन्ते । क्त्वाश्रुत्या भेदप्रतिपत्तिर् इति चेद् एवं तर्हि समावर्तनं विवाहाङ्गं स्नानसंस्कारं वक्ष्यति । सविशेषं हि तत्र स्नानम् आम्नातम् एव "स्नातकेन" इत्यादि ।

- <u>अथ वा</u> यमनियमत्यागाभिप्रायं समावृत्तिवचनम् । **समावृत्तः** प्राक्तनीम् एवावस्थां नियमरहितां प्रतिपन्न इत्य् अर्थः । विशेषाभिप्रायं च नियम्त्यागवचनम् । ब्रह्मचारिणो हि सातिशया यमनियमा न तथोत्तरेषाम् ।

- **यथाविधीति** स्वधर्मेनेतिवत् । **उद्वहेत द्विजो भार्याम्** । उद्वहेतेति विवाहविधिः । संस्कारकर्म विवाहः, **भार्याम्** इति द्वितीयानिर्देशात् । न च प्राग्विवाहाद् भार्या सिद्धास्ति यस्या विवाहसंस्कारः क्रियेत,[^३७] चक्षुष[^३८] इवाञ्जनसंस्कारः । किं तर्हि निर्वर्त्यते विवाहेन । यथा यूपं छिनत्तीति, छेदनादयः संस्कारा यस्य क्रियन्ते स यूपः, एवं विवाहेनैव भार्या भवतीति । 


[^३८]:
     M G 1st ed.: na cakṣuṣa


[^३७]:
     M G: kriyate

- विवाहशब्देन पाणिग्रहणम् उच्यते । तच् चात्र प्रधानम् । एवं हि स्मरन्ति "विवाहनं दारकर्म पाणिग्रहणम्" इति । इहापि वक्ष्यति "पाणिग्रहणसंस्कारः" (म्ध् ३.४३) इति लाजहोमाद्यङ्गम् । तच् च गृह्याद् अखिलं ज्ञातव्यम् । "नोद्वहेत् कपिलां कन्याम्" (म्ध् ३.८) इति कन्याग्रहणात् कन्याया अयं संस्कारो न स्त्रीमात्रस्य । कन्याशब्दश् चात्र प्रकरणे ऽप्रवृत्तपुंसंप्रयोगायां योषिति वर्तत इति वक्ष्यामः । 

- **स्वर्णां** समानजातीयाम् । **लक्षाणान्विताम्** । लक्षणानि अवैधव्यप्रजाधनसूचकानि वर्णरेखातिलकादिचिह्नानि ज्योतिःशास्त्रावगम्यानि, तैर् अन्वितां युक्ताम्, शुभलक्षणान्विताम् इत्य् अर्थः । यद्य् अप्य् अनिष्टसूचकम् अपि लक्षणं भवति, किं तु सूचकैर् एव शास्त्रैस् तादृशीं विवाहयेत्, अतः प्रशस्तलक्षणा लक्षणवती द्रष्टव्या । अभिप्रेतसूचक एव लक्षणशब्दो लोके प्रयुज्यते । सलक्षणो ऽयं पुरुषः सलक्षणा स्त्रीति या शुभलक्षणा सैवम् उच्यते ।

- तत्राधिकारचिन्ता कर्तव्या । संस्कारविधित्वाद् एवाधानवद् अनुष्ठानलाभात् यथैव ह्य् आधानम् आहवनीयादिद्वारेण नित्यकाम्यकर्मोपयोगि तदङ्गाहवनीयादिनिर्वृत्त्यर्थम् अनुष्ठीयते, एवं विवाहो ऽपि, अस्यापि[^३९] भार्यानिर्वर्तकत्वेन दृष्टादृष्टपुरुषार्थोपयोगित्वात् । तथा हि खेदात् पुंसः स्त्रीमात्रविषयायां[^४०] प्रवृत्तौ प्रसक्तायां कन्यापरदारनिषेधात् स्वदारेषु कामिनः खेदनिवृत्तिः । "सहधर्मश् चरितव्यः" (शब् ६.१.१७; च्ड़्। ग्ध् ४.७) इति तया सह सर्वधर्मेष्व् अधिकाराद् अदृष्टपुरुषार्थसिद्धिस् तदधीना ।


[^४०]:
     M G 1st ed.: -viṣayārthaṃ; G 2nd ed: -viṣayāṃ


[^३९]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: asyāpi

- <u>अत्र केचिन्</u> मीमांसन्ते ।  रागिणः पूर्वोक्तेन प्रकारेण दृष्टसिद्ध्यर्थं विवाहं स्वतः कुर्वन्ति । तेषां च कृतविवाहानां संभवेत् स द्विजातिकर्मविधित्वेन कर्मानुष्ठानसिद्ध्यर्थो विवाहः । यस्य कथंचित् स्त्रीनिष्ठा निवृत्ता, न तस्य विवाहः । असति विवाहे कर्मानधिकाराद् अनधिकृतस्य चाननुष्ठाने दोषाभावात् पुरुषार्थानुष्ठानान्य् अननुतिष्ठतो[^४१] ऽनाश्रमिणो ऽप्य् अवस्थानम् अविरुद्धम् ।


[^४१]:
     M G 1st ed.: anutiṣṭhato

- <u>तद् एतद् असत्</u> । यथैव कामः पुरुषार्थस् तथैव धर्मो ऽपि पुरुषार्थत्वे प्रयोजकः । सर्वो ऽपि पुरुषार्थसिद्ध्यर्थं प्रवर्तते । यदि चैतद् एवं स्यात् "संवत्सरम् अनाश्रमी बूत्वा" (च्ड़्। मेध् ओन् ६.८७) इत्यादि नोपपद्येतेति । निपुणं चैतद् आश्रमविकल्पावसरे षष्ठे निर्णेष्यामः ॥ ३.४ ॥

_यादृशी कन्या वोढव्या ताम् इदानीं दर्शयति ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even on the completion of the observances relating to Vedic Study, the
Boy shall “bathe” only when ‘*permitted by the Preceptor*.’ ‘*Bathing*’
here stands for a peculiar sacrament prescribed in the *Gṛhyasūtras*, as
the limit for the observances of the Religious Student. Why the term
‘bathing’ is used in this figurative sense we have already explained
above.

‘*Having returned*’—*i.e*., having gone through a particular
consecratory. rite consisting of the offering of the *Madhuparka*, etc.,
as laid down in the *Gṛhyasūtra*, and having returned from the
Preceptor’s home to his Father’s home.

All this has been mentioned as supplementary to the Injunction contained
in the term ‘*shall take*,’ being already known from other sources. The
‘return’ spoken of here is not a part of the ‘marriage.’ Hence for him
who has learnt the Veda in his Father’s house, though there can be no
‘Return,’ yet marriage is done.

Some people take the ‘Return’ to mean that Bath which forms part of the
marriage rites. Against this view it might be argued that the
participial ending ‘*ktvā*’ (in ‘*snātvā*’) clearly indicates that the
two (Bath and Return) are entirely different. But that ceremony of
‘Return’ which coṇsists in ‘bathing’ and which forms part of the
marriage rite, is going to be described later; where a particular form
of ‘Bathing’ with its details is found laid down, \[Hence the ‘Return’
mentioned, in the present verse cannot be regarded as part of
Marriage.\]

Or, the term ‘*Return*’ may be taken as intended to connote *the
renouncing of restraints and observances*. In that case, ‘*returned*’
would mean ‘having resumed the former condition free from all
restraint.’ Special stress is laid upon the *renouncing of restraints*
in this connection, because the observances and restraints imposed upon
the Religious Student are exceptionally hard, which is not the case with
the other subsequent stages of life.

‘*According to rule*’—this is to be construed like the term ‘in strict
accordance with his duties’ (of the preceding verse).

‘*The twice-born person shall take a wife*’—‘Shall take’ constitutes the
injunction of marriage. Marriage is a sacramental rite, a refining
process, as is indicated by the Accusative ending in ‘*bhāryām*.’

“But before marriage there does not exist such a thing as *wife* for
whom the refinement could be effected in the same manner as
ornamentation by collyrium is done to the Eye. In fact, it is by means
of marriage itself that the *wife* is brought into existence.”

In the case of the sacrificial post, we find such injunctions as the
‘sacrificial post shall be cut,’ and that same piece of wood becomes the
*post* on which the refining process of *cutting*, &c., has been
performed. Exactly in the same manner it is by means of the refining
process of marriage performed upon her that the person becomes a ‘wife.’

The word ‘marriage’ denotes the *taking hold of the hand*, which forms
the principal factor in the ceremony. To this effect we have the
assertion—‘marriage is taking a wife, *i.e*., the taking hold of the
hand;’ and in this work also marriage is spoken of as ‘the sacrament of
taking hold of the hand’ (verse 43 below). The offering of parched grain
and such other rites are the subsidiary details (of Marriage); and all
this may be learnt from the *Gṛhyasūtras*,

Later on (in verse 8) we read—‘one shall not marry a *maiden* with
golden hair, &e., &c.;’—and from the use of the term ‘maiden’ there it
is clear that marriage is a sacrament for maidens, and not for any and
every woman; and we are going to explain later on that in the present
context the term ‘maiden’ stands for *the female who has had no
intercourse with a male*.

‘*Of the same caste as himself*’—*i.e*., belonging to the same caste.

‘*Endowed with signs*,’—The term ‘*signs*’ stands for the colour of the
complexion, lines on the body, moles and such other marks which are
indicative of unwidowed life, offspring, wealth, and so forth,—which may
be learnt from the science of Astrology.—‘*Endowed’—i.e*.,
equipped—‘with these signs;’ *i.e*., bearing auspicious marks. Even
though indicators of evil are also called ‘signs,’ yet since what is
mentioned here is, that one should marry a girl with these signs, it
follows that what is meant is the girl with good, auspicious, signs. In
fact, the term, ‘*lakṣaṇa*,’ ‘sign,’ is used in ordinary parlance in the
sense of desirable signs; *e.g*., men and women are spoken of as
‘endowed with signs’ which means that they bear auspicious marks.

What we have to consider in this connection is the question of *title*
(Who is entitled to marry?).

Since the Injunction of marriage enjoins a sacrament, a consecration, it
comes to be performed just like the Laying of Fire; and just as the
Laying of Fire serves, through the *Āhavanīya* and other fires, the
purposes of compulsory and voluntary acts, and hence it comes to be
performed for the bringing into existence of the *Āhavanīya*, &c., as
subsidiary to those acts,—so the Marriage also brings into existence the
‘Wife,’ and through her serves the fulfilment of the visible and
unvisible ends of man. For example, when desire for sexual intercourse
arises in man, there arises the possibility of his having recourse to
any and every woman; but intercourse with maidens and wives of other men
being prohibited, the said desire comes to be accomplished only through
one’s own married wife \[The married wife thus serves a visible end\].
Then again, there is the saying that ‘every religious act shall be done
by the husband and wife together,’ which shows that it is only as
accompanied by his wife that man is entitled to the performance of
religious acts; and thus it is clear that the accomplishment of the
invisible (transcendental) purposes of man also is dependent upon the
wife.

In connection with this subject, some people make the following
observations:—“As just described, persons, with their sexual desire
aroused, have, of their own accord, their marriages done for the purpose
of accomplishing their visible ends; and after they have married, they
happen to perform certain religious acts; and in this case, the marriage
might thus turn out to be of use in the fulfilment of religious acts.
But in a case where a man’s desire for intercourse with women has
entirely ceased, there is no marriage at all;—there being no marriage,
the man is not entitled to the performance of religious acts;—in the
absence of such title, the non-performance of acts shall involve no
sin;—consequently, there need be nothing reprehensible in the conduct of
the man who does not take to the Householder’s life and does not perform
any religious acts conducive to the ends of man.”

This, however, is not right. Religious acts are as much conducive to the
fulfilment of man’s purpose as sexual desire is. In fact, every man
engages in activity only for the accomplishment of some purpose of his.
If this were not so (*i.e*., the entrance into the Householder’s state
were not essential), then there would be no room for such assertions as
‘desisting for a year from entering into the Householder’s state, &c.,
&c.’ *We* shall explain this fully under Discourse VI, in connection
with the question of option regarding the Life-stages.—(4)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 462) simply as
laying down marriage;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 131) as indicating the
necessity for marriage;—also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 673);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 567), as indicating that the ‘Final Bath’
spoken of above (in 1. 245) is meant to be for the purpose of
marriage;—on the ground that the Bath is here spoken of in connection
with the twice-born person *who is going to marry*; while we do not meet
with any such assertion as ‘Having bathed, he should betake himself to
the forest,’ or that ‘having bathed,’ he should bike to Renunciation;—in
the same work on p. 585, in support of the view that Marriage is meant
to be conducive to the fulfilment of the man’s purpose, the following
notes are added:—the term ‘*dvija*’ serves to show that it is only the
twice-born person *endowed with the above-mentioned qualifications* that
is entitled to marriage; and it does not mean that any and every
twice-born person is entitled to it; and that this is so is clear from
the fact that marriage has been laid down only for one who has had his
Initiation and has taken the ‘Final Bath’ of the Studentship. Nor again
can the term ‘*dvija*’ be taken as precluding others; as in that case
there would be no marriage for the *Śūdra*. From all this it follows
that the present text should be taken as enjoining a particular act as
pertaining to a particularly qualified person.—The term ‘*bhāryā*,’
‘wife,’ has been used in view of the future status of the girl; so that
the meaning of the injunction comes to be that ‘he should bring into
existence a *wife* by means of the marriage-ceremony.’—The term
‘*Savarṇā*,’ ‘of the same caste’ is meant to indicate that such a
marriage would be in its principal form: and it does not preclude the
marrying of girls of other castes; this is in fact sanctioned by other
texts.

The same work quotes the verse again on page 747, as laying down the
‘principal’ wife ordained for man.

*Vīramitrodaya* again in its ‘*Lakṣaṇa*’ section (p. 118) quotes the
second half of this verse under the ‘the characteristics of women.’

It is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 940) to the effect that
‘*Samāvartana*’ is another name for the concluding rites of
Studentship;—in *Aparārka* (p. 76) as indicating that the ‘Bath’ is
distinct from the *Samāvartana* ceremony;—in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p.
680);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 403);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 49a.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (8. 1).—‘The Householder, with anger and joy under control,
when permitted by the teacher, should take up a wife of the same grade
as himself, younger in age, not having the same sage (as an ancestor),
and who has not had intercourse.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 52).—‘Having gone through his studentship intact, he
should marry a qualified girl, one who has not belonged to another man,
loving and younger in age, who is not a *Sapiṇḍa*.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 5. 3).—‘One should marry a girl who is free
from disease and endowed with intelligence, beauty, modesty and other
good qualities.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 9. 4).—‘On the completion of his study, he
should approach the teacher with presets and then, permitted by him, he
should take the Bath.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyāsūtra* (2. 6.1-4).—‘Having finished the Veda,he should
take the Bath;...............permitted by the teacher.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (2. 1. 1. 2).—‘One should take to a wife during the
Puṣya-Asterism,—one who is endowed with comendable qualities.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 4. 1-3).—‘The Religious Student, having studied
the Veda, and having offered presents to the Teacher, should take a
wife, after being permitted by the Teacher.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 586).—‘Having taken the Bath, one should
marry a girl of one’s own caste, endowed with good qualities.’

*Dakṣa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 586).—‘Having, with due effort, studied the
Veda both verbally and intelligently, he shall marry a girl endowed with
good qualities, after having previously taken the Bath.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

004	Having bathed, with the permission of his teacher, and performed according to the rule the Samavartana (the rite on returning home), a twice-born man shall marry a wife of equal caste who is endowed with auspicious (bodily) marks.
</details>
