+++
title = "005 असपिण्डा च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

She who is not a “sapiṇḍa” of one’s mother, not of the same “Gotra” as his Father, and who is not born of (unlawful) intercourse—has been recommended for marriage.—(5)


“Three kinds of sapiṇḍā have got to be excluded—


To the first category belongs the girl who is one’s own sapiṇḍā as being the sapiṇḍā of his father, who is the married husband of his mother;—to the second category belongs the girl who is not the sapiṇḍā of that ‘father’ who is only the supporter (not the progenitor), and is one’s own and his natural father’s (progenitor’s) sapiṇḍā,—and who thus is his own sapiṇḍā, but not that of his supporter-‘father’;—and to the third class belongs that girl who is the sapiṇḍā of the supporter-‘father’, but not one’s own sapiṇḍā. All this diversity is based upon the fact that in the case of the ‘adopted’ son (in whose case the supporter-father and the progenitor-father are different), the son’s body (piṇḍa) does not contain the constituent elements of the body of the father.


For the same reasons there are four kinds of ‘father’ also—


Of these the ‘progenitor’, husband of the mother, and the ‘seed-owner’ both transmit the constituents of their body to the child; and on that ground the sāpiṇḍya ‘consanguinity’; of these two Fathers to the Aurasa and Kṣetraja sons would be direct; while that of the ‘field-owner’ (the second kind of ‘father’) would be only indirect, through the field (i.e., the body of his wife); the bodies of the husband and wife having been declared to bo one.—Now the girls that fall within these three kinds of ‘consanguinity would become excluded by the test that ‘one should marry a girl younger than himself, who is not his sapiṇḍā’ (Yājñavalkya 1. 52). But the Sapiṇḍā of the Supporter (adoptive) father would not be the Sapiṇḍā of the adopted son, and as such she would not he excluded by the said text. Hence it becomes necessary to find out a text excluding the ‘father’s Sapiṇḍā;’ and such a text is found in Manu 3. 5 (the present verse). This text clearly implies that the girl who falls within seven degrees of the ‘Sāpiṇḍya’ of the Secondary Father (not the progenitor) is to be avoided; in this sense the term pituḥ, being taken in its etymological sense of one who supports, pāti iti pitā, includes the adoptive, father also.”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मातुर् यासपिण्डा पितुश् च यासगोत्रा सा दारकर्मणि प्रशस्ता** । सपिण्डग्रहणं मातृबन्धूपलक्षणार्थम् । मातुर् हि सापिण्ड्यं स्त्रीणां स्मृत्यन्तरे तृतीयपुरुषावधि । न तु त्रिभ्य ऊर्ध्वं मातृबन्धुभ्यो विवाह इष्यते, किं तर्हि, पञ्चमाद् ऊर्ध्वम् । एवं हि गौतमः पठति- "ऊर्ध्वं सप्तमात् पितृबन्धुभ्यो मातृबन्धुभ्यः पञ्चमात्" इति (ग्ध् ४.३–५) । तेन यथाश्रुतिसमन्वयाभावात् सापिण्ड्याभावः स्मृत्यन्तरवशेन मातृसंबन्धितया व्याकरणीयः । तेनैवम् उक्तं स्यात् मातुर् अन्वयजा जाया[^४२] न भवति । अवधिश् च गौतमीय एव । तेन मातामहमातामहयोर्[^४३] ऽन्वये जाता सा पुत्रसंततेर् बान्धवसामीप्यात् पञ्चमीं यावन् न विवाहयितव्या । अतो मातृष्वसृतद्दुहितॄणां प्रमातामहसंततिजानां[^४४] च सर्वासां प्रतिषेधः, बन्धुत्वाविशेषात् ।


[^४४]:
     M G 1st ed.: pramātāmahī-


[^४३]:
     M G 1st ed.: mātāmahī=


[^४२]:
     M G 1st ed.: yā

- **असगोत्रा च या पितुः** । गोत्रं वसिष्ठभृगुगर्गादिवंशः स्मर्यते । समानगोत्रा वसिष्ठा न वसिष्ठैर् विवहन्ते न गर्गा गर्गैः । वासिष्ठे तु मातृसगोत्राया अपि प्रतिषेधः- 

- परिणीय सगोत्रां तु समानप्रवरां तथा । 

- कृत्वा तस्याः समुत्सर्गं द्विजश् चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ।

- मातुलस्य सुतां चैव मातृगोत्रां तथैव च ॥

गौतमेन तु पठ्यते- "असमानप्रवरैर् विवाहः" इति (ग्ध् ४.२) । तत्र गोत्रसमत्वे सत्य् अपि प्रवरभेदश् चेद् युज्यते विवाहः । तद् अयुक्तम्, यतः स्मृत्यन्तरे ह्य् उभयं निषिध्यते- "असमानार्षगोत्रजाम्" (य्ध् १.५३) इति । आर्षं प्रवर इत्य् एको ऽर्थः । कथं पुनर् गोत्रभेदे समानार्षेयत्वम् । किम् इति न भवति यदि स्मर्यते । श्रुतिस्मृतिप्रमाणको ऽयम् अर्थो न प्रत्यक्षगोचरो येन विरोधः स्यात् । के पुनर् अमी प्रवरा नाम । अत्यल्पम् इदम् उच्यते । इदम् अपि वक्तव्यम्- किं पुनर् एतद् ब्राह्मणत्वं नाम, तथा कतरद् एतद् गोत्रं नाम । यथैव समाने पुरुषत्वे ब्राह्मणत्वादिविशेषः, एवं समाने ब्राह्मणत्वे वसिष्ठादिगोत्रभेदः, प्रतिगोत्रं च समानार्षेयाणि । यस्यैतद् गोत्रं तस्य तैः शब्दैः प्रवराश्रयणं कर्तव्यम् । एवं विवाहनिषेधे ऽपि । स्मरन्ति च सूत्रकाराः गोत्रभेदसंबन्धेन प्रवरान्- "यस्यैतद् गोत्रं तस्येमे प्रवराः" इति । गोत्रभेदस् तु तद्गोत्रजैर् एव । स्मर्यते- "वयं पराशरा वयम् उपमन्यवः" इति । यद्य् अपि गोत्रवत् प्रवरान् अपि स्मरन्ति, तथापि बहुत्वात् कदाचिद् विस्मरेयुर् इति गोत्रम् उपलक्षणीकृत्य प्रवरस्मृतिर् उपनिबद्धा । गोत्रं तु स्मरन्ति । न च तस्य किंचिद् उपलक्षणम् अस्ति- य एवंरूपस् तस्येदं गोत्रम् इति । एतावत् तत्र स्मरणम् । यावद्गोत्रं संततिसमानजातीयत्वम्[^४५] । 


[^४५]:
     M G: saṃtatiḥ

- एष च गोत्रप्रवरभेदः ब्राह्मणानां न राजन्यविषाम्[^४६] । तथा हि कल्पसूत्रकारः- "पौरोहित्याद् राजन्यवैशयोः" इति । यद्य् अपि गोत्रविशेषव्यपदेशे सति प्राप्तप्रतिषेधेनापि प्रवराधिकारे वचनम् इदम् उपपद्यते, किं तु न तेषां गोत्रस्मरणम् अस्ति । <u>कस् तर्हि</u> क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् विवाहे ऽपि बन्धूनाम् अवधेर् नियमः ।


[^४६]:
     M G 1st ed.: brāhmaṇarājanyaviṣām

- <u>उच्यते</u> । सर्ववर्णविषयम् एतत् "ऊर्ध्वं सप्तमात् पितृबन्धुभ्यः" (ग्ध् ४.३) इति । इहाप्य् असगोत्रा, **च**शब्दाद् असपिण्डा । तथा चानुवर्त्यमानः सपिण्डशब्दः पूर्ववद् बन्धुसंबन्धोपलक्षणार्थः । तेन पितृष्वसुर् अन्वयस्त्रीणाम् अन्यासां च प्रपितामहसंततिस्त्रीणां आ सप्तमात् पुरुषात् प्रतिषेधः सिद्धो भवति । सप्तमपुरुषावधयः सपिण्डाः स्मर्यन्ते ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु गोत्रं वंशम् आहुः । न तत्रावध्यपेक्षा । यावद् एतज् ज्ञायते वयम् एकवंशा इति तावद् अविवाहः । अस्मिन्न् अपि पक्षे असपिण्डा चेत्य् अनुवर्तते । तेन पूर्ववत् पितृष्वस्रादिदुहितॄणां प्रतिषेधः । अस्मिंस् तु पक्षे समानार्षगोत्राणां प्रतिषेधो दुर्लभः । न हि तत्रैतद् अस्ति वयम् एकवंश्या इति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । ऐतिहासिकेन तद्दर्शनेन समर्थयन्ते । तत्र हि वर्णयन्ति । "ऋषिर् वसिष्ठादिर् आद्यो वंशस्य कर्ता तद्गोत्रास् ततः प्रसूताः प्रवराः" इति तत्पुत्रपौत्रास् तपोविद्याद्यतिशयगुणयोगेन प्रख्याततमाः । स्मृत्यन्तराद् एष एव नियमः । 

- इदं त्व् अत्र निरूप्यं यद् एतत् समानप्रवरैर् इति तत्र नामधेयतस् तावत् समानत्वं न संख्यातः । नामधेयसमानत्वे च किं यत्र सर्वाण्य् एव समानानि तत्र प्रतिषेध उतैकस्मिन्न् अपि समाने । तत्र यदि समुदितानां प्रवरत्वम्, तत्र समाने कस्मिंश्चिद् भिन्ने ऽन्यस्मिन्न् अन्यः समुदायः संजात इत्य् असमानप्रवरत्वाच् च प्रतिषेधः । एवं चोपमन्यूनां पराशराणां च स्याद् विवाहः । भिन्नं तयोर् गोत्रम् । एक उपमन्यवः अपरे पराशराः, पूर्वेण च न्यायेन प्रवरभेदः । उपमन्यूनां वासिष्ठभारद्वाजैकपाद् इति प्रवराः । पराशराणां वासिष्ठगार्ग्यपाराशर्येति । अथैकैकस्य प्रवरत्वम् एकस्मिन्न् अपि समाने प्रतिषेधः । तद् यथा माषा न भोक्तव्या, मिश्रा अपि न भुज्यन्ते । 

- किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । एकैकस्य प्रवरत्वम् । तथा हि सामानाधिकरण्यं दृश्यते । एकं वृणीते द्वौ वृणीते त्रीन् वृणीत इति प्रतिपन्न एकः । तत्साम्ये ऽप्य् आहैषाम् अविवाह इति ।

- **द्विजाति**ग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । शूद्रस्यापि आ सप्तमात् पितृतः पञ्चमान् मातृत[^४७] इत्य् अस्ति । दारकरणं दारक्रिया **दारकर्म** । तत्र **प्रशस्ता** प्रशंसया विहितेत्य् अर्थः । **मैथुनी** । मिथुने भवा **मैथुनी**, न मैथुनी अमैथुनी । पितुर् इति संबध्यते, पितृबीजाद् एवोत्पन्ना जातमात्रा । नियोगो विहितस् तत उत्पन्नाया नास्ति पूर्वोक्तविशेषणैर् निषेधः । अतः पृथङ् निषिध्यते **अमैथुनीति** । ततो नियोगोत्पन्ना कामतो न विवाह्या, मैथुनीत्वात् । 


[^४७]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: pañcamān mātṛta

- अन्ये तु **अमैथुने** इति पठन्ति । धर्मार्थे दारकर्मणि प्रशस्ता, न मैथुने । स्तुतिश् चेयं न प्रतिषेधः । ईदृशी योढा सा सत्य् अपि मैथुने धर्मार्थैव भवति ॥ ३.५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The text proceeds to show what sort of maiden should be married.

‘*She who is not a sapiṇḍa of one’s mother*, *and who is not of the same
gotra as his Father, has been recommended for marriage*.’ The term
‘*sapiṇḍa*’ indicates the relations on the mother’s side. According to
another Smṛti, women are called the “mother’s sapiṇḍa” only up to three
steps of relationship. But, as a matter of fact, marriage with relatives
on the mother’s side is permitted beyond not the *third*, but the
*fifth*, step of relationship. Says Gautama (4—3 and 5)—‘Beyond the
seventh step of relationship on the Father’s side and beyond the fifth
step on the mother’s side.’ Thus, inasmuch as the term ‘*sapiṇḍa*’
cannot be taken here in its literal sense (of relation within *three*
steps of relationship), it has to be explained, in accordance with other
*Smṛtis* (such as Gautama), as standing for ‘mother’s relation.’ The
meaning thus comes to be—‘She who is not born of the mother’s family;’
and the limit of *relationship* is to be taken as prescribed by Gautama.
So that one should not marry the girl who is descended either from his
maternal grandfather or great-grandfather, up to five steps downwards,
on account of the closeness of relationship among the descendants of
these. Hence the mother’s sister, the daughter of the mother’s sister,
as also those descended from the maternal great-grandmother, all these
become excluded, on the ground of all of them being ‘relations.’

‘*She who is not of the same gotra as his Father*—The term ‘*gotra*’ has
been declared to stand for the descendants of

Vaśiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Garga and the rest.—‘*Of the same gotra*’ means
*belonging to same gotra*. That is, a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ girl cannot be married
by a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ boy; nor the ‘Garga’ girl by a ‘Garga’ boy.

In the *Vaśiṣṭha* (Dharmaśāstra), there is prohibition also of the girl
belonging to the same *gotra* as one’s mother. It says—‘If the
twice-born person marries a girl of the same *gotra* or the same
*Pravara* as himself, he shall renounce her and perform the penance of
the Cāndrāyaṇa; so also if he has married the daughter of his maternal
uncle, or a girl of the same *gotra* as his mother.’

Gautama says—‘There is marriage between parties not having the same
*Pravara*’ (4.2); so that if the *Pravara* is different, there may be
marriage, even though the *gotra* happen to be the same.

This, however, is not right; because another Smṛti (Yājñavalkya) has
prohibited both—‘one should marry a girl born of a *different gotra and
Ṛṣi*’ (Acāra, 53),—where ‘*Ṛṣi*’ stands for ‘pravara.’

“But how can a girl be born of the same *Ṛṣis* when her *gotra* is
different?”

Why may this not be possible when the *Smṛti* distinctly speaks of it?
This subject is one that falls entirely within the purview of *Śruti and
Smṛti*, and is beyond our perception; so that there could be no
incongruity (in what is directly asserted in the *Smṛti*).

“What are ‘*pravaras*,’ after all?”

Well, you are asking too little; you might as well ask—‘What is a
Brāhmaṇa?’ ‘What is a gotra?’ In fact, just as the generic character of
‘man’ being equally present in all men, the ‘Brāhmaṇa’ and the rest
constitute the particular species included under that generic
character,—exactly in the same manner, the generic character of
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ being common among a number of men, ‘*Vaśiṣṭha*’ and the
rest come in as specific sub-divisions; and related to each ‘*gotra*’
there are a few names of ‘*Ṛṣis*;’ and the person who belongs to a
certain ‘*gotra*’ has to connect himself with these Ṛṣi-names, which are
called his ‘*pravara*.’ This same is the meaning of the term ‘*pravara*’
in connection with the prohibition of marriage.

The writers of Sūtras have mentioned the *pravaras* along with each
distinct *gotra*, in such words as—‘such and such are the *pravaras* of
the person belonging to such and such a *gotra*.’ As for the distinct
*gotras*, these are duly remembered by the persons born in those
*gotras* themselves—‘we belong to the ‘*Parāśara-gotra*,’ ‘we belong to
the *Upamanyu-gotra*,’ and so forth. Though, like.their *gotra*, people
remember their *pravaras* also, yet inasmuch as the number of *pravaras*
is large, it was thought that people might forget them, and hence the
Smṛtis were written for the purpose of mentioning the *pravaras*
connected with each of the *gotras*. As for the *gotra*, save that
people themselves remember it, there is no other indicative in the form
that ‘he who is like this and that belongs to such and such a *gotra*.
All that has been declared in connection with *gotra* is that persons
belonging to the same *gotra* must belong to a common stock and a common
caste.

This diversity of *Gotra* and *Pravara* is found only among Brāhmaṇas,
not Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas. Say the authors of the *Kalpasūtra*—‘that of
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya is determined by that of their priests.’ On
the ground of this Kalpasūtra-statement occurring in the section dealing
with *Pravara*, it might be construed to be a denial of *pravara* only,
which might be understood to apply to those two castes also by reason of
particular *gotras* having been mentioned in relation to them. But, in
reality, there are no *gotras* mentioned in connection with them.

“Under the circumstances, what sort of restriction would there be on the
point of relationship, in connection with marriages?”

Our answer is as follows:—The rule of Gautama (4. 3), that ‘it should be
beyond the seventh step among the relations on the father’s side,’ is
common to all castes (and this would supply the necessary limitation).

In the present verse also the term ‘*not of the same gotra*’ means ‘who
is not a *Sapiṇḍa*;’ and, just as the term ‘*sapiṇda*,’ in the preceding
phrase, so the same term here also, would be taken as standing for
‘relations;’ and in this way we secure the exclusion of girls descended
from the father’s sister, as also of other girls descended from one’s
great-grandfather, up to the seventh step. And it is only persons up to
the seventh step of relationship that have been called ‘*sapiṇḍa*.’

Others have explained ‘*gotra*’ to mean *family*. And in this case,
there is no need for any limit; there can be no marriage among parties
who know each other as ‘belonging to the same family.’ In accordance
with this view also the term ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ has to be construed twice
over; so that, as before, the daughter of the father’s sister and Others
become excluded.

“But, according to this view, the exclusion of girls belonging to the
same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras* becomes difficult. As among
these there is no such idea as that ‘we belong to the same family.’”

The answer to the above is that this difficulty is sought to be
explained by a reference to tradition. There is a tradition that
‘Vaśiṣṭha and others like him are the prime progenitors of families, and
persons descended from them and belonging to their *gotra* are the
*Pravaras*, who were their sons and grandsons endowed with excellent
austerities and learning and vastly famous.’ \[ And in this sense
‘persons belonging to the same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras*’
may be regarded as ‘belonging to the same family.’\] In other *Smṛtis*
also we find the same rule.

The following facts, however, have to be borne in mind in this
connection:—In the phrase, ‘having the same *pravaras*,’ the *sameness*
is in regard to the *names*, not the mere *number*, of *Pravaras*; and
the question arises, whether the prohibition applies to all cases where
al the Pravara-names are the same, or only to those where even one name,
happens to be common. If the whole set of names constitutes the
‘*pravara*,’ then there is no ‘sameness of Pravara’ in a case where a
few names are common but others are different, and hence the ‘set of
names’ in the two cases becomes different; so that the prohibition would
not apply to such a case; and marriage could take place between the
*Upamanyus* and the *Parāśaras*, whose *gotras* are different,—one
belonging to the *Gotra* of Upamanyu, and the other to the *gotra* of
Parāśara,—but there is difference in their. ‘*pravaras*,’ in the Sense
noted above; because for the ‘*Upamanyu gotra*’ the *Pravaras* are
‘Vaśiṣṭha, Bharadvāja and Ekapāt,’ while for the ‘*Parāśara gotra*’ they
are ‘Vaśiṣṭhya, Gārgya and Parāśarya.’ If, on the other hand, only one
name constituted the ‘Pravara’—and not the whole set, then the
prohibition would apply to even such cases where a single name happens
to be common. *E.g*., when it is said ‘*Māṣa* grains should not be
eaten,’ one ceases to eat even mixed *Māṣa* grains.

What, then, is the right view?

The right view is that single names constitute ‘*pravara*; it is in
accordance with this that we find such usage as ‘*ekam vṛṇīte*,’ ‘*dvau
vṛnīte*,’ ‘*trīn vṛnīte*,’—where there is co-ordination between ‘one,’
‘two’ and ‘three’ with the ‘*Pravara*;’ and it is said that ‘there
should be no marriage even when, one pravara-name is common.’

The mention of the ‘twice-born person’ is merely indicative; as for the
*Śūdra also* there is no marriage up to seven grades of relationship on
the father’s aide, and five on the mother’s side.

‘*Marriage*’—*i.e*., taking to wife.

‘*Recommended*’—enjoined with commendation.

‘*Who is not born of (unlawful) intercourse*,’ *i.e*., who is born
directly from her lawful father. ‘*Niyoga*’ (begetting of offspring by
the widow) having been permitted, the girl who would be born under that
form would not be excluded by the foregoing qualifications; hence she is
separately excluded by the term ‘*who its not born of unlawful
intercourse*;’ which means that one should not voluntarily marry a girl
born, of ‘Niyoga,’ because she is born of unlawful intercourse.

Others read ‘*Amaithune*’ (for ‘*Amaithunī*), and explain it to mean
that the girl described has been recommended as an associate at
religions functions, and *not for sexual intercourse*.

And such a prohibition would be by way of eulogy; the sense being—‘if
one marries a girl with these qualifications, she fulfills his religious
functions, even though there be no sexual intercourse.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Asapiṇḍā ca yā mātuḥ—asagotrā ca yā pituḥ*’—Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda hold the first ‘*ca*’ to mean that the ‘sagotrā’ of the
mother also is excluded; this exclusion is supported by Vaśiṣṭha as
quoted by Medhātithi;—according to Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka,
Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda, the second ‘*ca*’ connects the ‘*asapiṇḍā*’
with ‘*pituḥ*’ also. But there appears to be no point in this as the
father’s ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ would be already included under the father’s
‘*asagotrā*’. Medhātithi appears to have been conscious of this, as he
adds that the term ‘*sapiṇḍa*’ here stands for ‘relations’ \[see
*Trans*. p. 26, ll. 3-4, which should be as follows, and not as it
appears there—“*In the present phrase* ‘*asagotrā ca pituḥ*’, *the
particle* ‘*ca*’ *excludes the fathers sapiṇḍā also*.”\]

‘*Amaithunī*’—This is the reading adopted by Medhātithi, to whom Buhler
wrongly attributes the reading ‘*maithune*’ (‘for conjugal union’),
which is the reading of Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka, the last
however explaining it to mean ‘(she is recommended) for the Firelaying,
child-begetting and other acts to be performed by the husband and wife
jointly.’—Medhātithi notes a third reading ‘*amaithune*’, and explains
it to mean that ‘the girl is recommended as an associate at religious
functions, and *not for sexual intercourse*, though he does not consider
this satisfactory.—Medhātithi’s reading ‘*amathunī*’ has been explained
by him to mean ‘not born of unlawful intercourse’, and added for the
purpose of excluding the girl horn of *Niyoga*. Though Nandana also
adopts this same reading, he explains it as one ‘who has had no sexual
intercourse.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 81) in support of the view that
the girl to be married should be one who is ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ on both the
paternal and the maternal sides; it adds that ‘*asagotrā*’ alone would
preclude the *father’s* ‘sagotrā’ also (the gotra of the man being the
same as his father’s); the word ‘*pituḥ*’ has therefore been added with
a view to the ‘*putrikāputra*’.—Such a girl is ‘recommended’—for
‘*dārakarma*’—such rites as cannot be performed without a wife and for
‘*maithune*’, *i.e*., such rites as can he done only conjointly by the
pair, *e.g*. the *Pākayajña*, and the like,—‘*asapiṇḍā ca yā mātuḥ*’ is
meant to preclude the marrying of the daughter of the maternal uncle,
she being the man’s ‘mother’s *sapiṇḍā*’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 468), where the
following explanation is added—‘who is *asapiṇḍā* of the mother, as also
her *asagotrā*—who is *asagotrā* of the father, and also his
*asapiṇḍā*,—is recommended for all acts to be performed by the
couple’.—It raises the question that the separate mention of the
‘mother’ is superfluous; as the wife has no ‘*piṇḍa*’ or ‘*gotra*’ apart
from the husband; so that the ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ and ‘*asagotrā*’ of the
‘mother’ would be the same as those of the ‘father’;—and supplies the
answer that in the case of the *Gāndharva* and some other forms of
marriage, the bride being not given away by her father, she retains her
*gotra* and *piṇḍa*; so that her ‘*sapinda*’ and ‘*asagotra*’ would not
be the same as those of her husband.

In connection with this verse a peculiar point of view has been set
forth by ‘some people’ in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 691):—

> “Three kinds of *sapiṇḍā* have got to be excluded—
>
> 1.  who is one’s own and his father’s *sapiṇḍā*,
> 2.  who is one’s own *sapiṇḍā*, but not the *sapiṇḍā* of his father,
> 3.  who is not one’s own *sapiṇḍā*, but is the father’s *sapiṇḍā*.
>
> To the first category belongs the girl who is one’s own *sapiṇḍā* as
> being the *sapiṇḍā* of his father, who is the married husband of his
> mother;—to the second category belongs the girl who is not the
> *sapiṇḍā* of that ‘father’ who is only the *supporter* (not the
> *progenitor*), and is one’s own and his natural father’s
> (progenitor’s) *sapiṇḍā*,—and who thus is his own *sapiṇḍā*, but *not*
> that of his supporter-‘father’;—and to the third class belongs that
> girl who is the *sapiṇḍā* of the supporter-‘father’, but not one’s own
> *sapiṇḍā*. All this diversity is based upon the fact that in the case
> of the ‘adopted’ son (in whose case the supporter-father and the
> progenitor-father are different), the son’s body (*piṇḍa*) does not
> contain the constituent elements of the body of the father.
>
> For the same reasons there are four kinds of ‘father’ also—
>
> 1.  the progenitor, the husband of the mother;
> 2.  the owner of the ‘field, *i.e*. the mother’s husband, who is not
>     the progenitor;
> 3.  the owner of the ‘seed’, *i. e*. the progenitor, who is not the
>     husband of the mother;
> 4.  and the supporter, *i.e*. the adoptive father.
>
> Of these the ‘progenitor’, husband of the mother, and the ‘seed-owner’
> both transmit the constituents of their body to the child; and on that
> ground the *sāpiṇḍya* ‘consanguinity’; of these two Fathers to the
> *Aurasa* and *Kṣetraja* sons would be direct; while that of the
> ‘field-owner’ (the second kind of ‘father’) would be only indirect,
> through the *field* (*i.e*., the body of his wife); the bodies of the
> husband and wife having been declared to bo *one*.—Now the girls that
> fall within these three kinds of ‘consanguinity would become excluded
> by the test that ‘one should marry a girl younger than himself, who is
> not his *sapiṇḍā*’ (Yājñavalkya 1. 52). But the *Sapiṇḍā* of the
> Supporter (adoptive) father would not be the *Sapiṇḍā* of the adopted
> son, and as such she would not he excluded by the said text. Hence it
> becomes necessary to find out a text excluding the ‘father’s
> *Sapiṇḍā*;’ and such a text is found in Manu 3. 5 (the present verse).
> This text clearly implies that the girl who falls within seven degrees
> of the ‘*Sāpiṇḍya*’ of the *Secondary Father* (not the progenitor) is
> to be avoided; in this sense the term *pituḥ*, being taken in its
> etymological sense of one *who supports*, *pāti iti pitā*, includes
> the *adoptive*, father also.”

This view is not accepted by the author of *Vīramitrodaya* himself, who
takes Manu’s text to mean the exclusion of the girl who is one’s
*Sapiṇḍā* or *Sagotrā* either through his father or through his mother.

*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 106) quotes this verse, explaining *daṛa-karma* as
‘the act of making a wife’ *i.e*., *the, taking of a wife*.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1. 53, p. 34)
in the sense that the *sagotrā* girl is to be excluded.

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 690) quotes this verse and adds that the second
‘*ca*’ excludes the father’s ‘*Sapiṇḍā*’ also. Here also we have a
reproduction of the discussion found in *Parāśaramādhava* (see above).

The verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 133), which adds the
following explanatory notes:—The meaning of this is as follows—The girl
who is *not-sapiṇḍā* of the mother,—and also her *not-sagotrā*, which is
implied by the first ‘*ca*’—is recommended, *i.e*., is fit for being
married. The purport of all this is as follows—Twice-born men are
entitled to marry girls belonging to the same caste as themselves, as
also those belonging to lower castes; the marriage with a girl of the
same caste is the principal or primary form of it, while that with a
girl of a different caste is only secondary;—for the married man two
kinds of acts have been enjoined—sacrifices and intercourse; and in the
text the former set of acts is spoken of by the term ‘*dāra-karma*’, and
the latter set by the term ‘*maithuna*’

Having explained the verse, *Madanapārijāta* also raises the question
why the *Sapiṇḍā* and *Sagotrā* of the *Mother* should be mentioned
apart from that of the *Father*, and deals with it in a somewhat
different manner from that in *Parāśaramādhava* or *Vidhānapārijāta*.
Its answer is that the separate mention is meant to meet the following
case—Devadatta has for Ids mother the *adopted* daughter (of his
grandfather), who has been ‘appointed’ by her adoptive ‘father’;—hence
Devadatta does not inherit the *gotra* of his Progenitor-father;—now the
husband of the aforesaid adopted daughter (*i. e*. the progenitor of
Devadatta) has adopted a daughter, who is the *Sapiṇḍā* of her adoptive
father (Devadatta’s Progenitor), but not the *Sapiṇḍā* of
Devadatta;—thus Devadatta might marry the adopted daughter of his
progenitor. This contingency has been prevented by the separate
exclusion of the ‘Mother’s *Sapiṇḍā*; as the girl, though not the
*Sapiṇḍā* of Devadatta or his adoptive Father, would still be the
*Sapiṇḍā* of his mother, whose *piṇḍa* is one with that of her husband,
(the adoptive father of the girl concerned).

Another question raised is why should the mother’s *asapiṇḍā*, who is
included in the mother’s *asagotrā* implied by the *eha* in the text, be
mentioned separately?—The ‘mother’s *Sapiṇḍā*’ has got to be so
mentioned for the purpose of excluding the girl born in the family of
the father of one’s step-mother, who is one’s own ‘*asapiṇḍā*’, as also
the ‘*asagotrā*’ of the mother, but is the ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ of the mother; so
that if the text had excluded only the ‘mother’s *asagotrā*,’ the said
girl would he marriageable; she becomes excluded, however, by the
condition that she should *not* he his *Another’s sapiṇḍā*’.

It goes on to raise a. further question that the phrase ‘*asagotrā ca
pituḥ*’ need not be taken to include the father’s ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ also, as
the latter is already included under the term ‘father’s *asagotrā*’.—The
answer to this is that the separate exclusion of the ‘father’s
*sapiṇḍā*’ is necessary in view of the following case:—Devadatta’s
father, Yajñadatta, is the adopted son of his father, Bhānudatta,—a girl
is born in the family of Yajñadatta’s *progenitor-father*,—this girl
would be *asagotrā* of Devadatta’s ‘father’ (adoptive), and also
‘*asagotrā*’ of his ‘mother’:—thus there would be a likelihood of
Devadatta marrying this girl;—and this becomes precluded by taking the
‘ca’ to mean the ‘*father’s asapiṇḍā*’. If this had not been intended by
Manu, he would have said ‘*one’s own asagotrā*’ (‘*asagotrā ca
yātmanaḥ*’). Thus the upshot of all this is that the girl to be married
should be ‘*asapiṇḍā* and *asagotrā*’ of his Mother, and also
‘*asapiṇḍā* and *asagotrā* of his Father’.

This verse is quoted also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 196);—in
*Gotra-pravara-nibandha-kadamba* (p. 131), which adds the following
notes:—In as much as the text forbids only the ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ of the
mother, it follows that the *sagotrā* of the mother is not forbidden;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 184), which adds the following
explanation:—The girl who is not ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ either of the bridegroom or
of his mother, and who is not the ‘*sagotrā*’ of the bridegroom or his
father, is commended for the purpose of marriage;—in *OodādharUpaddhati*
(Kālasāra, p. 223), which adds the following notes—‘*Dārakarmaṇi*’, in
the rite that makes a ‘wife’,—‘*maithune*’, in the act of intercourse
*which is consummated conjointly by man and woman*;—the sense is that
the said girl is commended not only for cooking and such other acts as
are done by the woman alone, but also in that joint act which is done by
both conjointly; according to *Kalpataru*, ‘*maithune*’ means ‘in the
begetting of the lawful son by means of sexual intercourse’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 477), in support of
the view that not only the girl, but her family also should be carefully
examined;—also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 588);—in *Aparārka* (p.
84);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 508);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 204).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (4. 2-5).—‘Marriage should he performed with persons not
belonging to the same *Pravara*;—above the Seventh grade among his
paternal relations;—also beyond persons of the same *seed*;—and above
the fifth grade among maternal relations.’

*Vaśiṣṭḥa* (8. 1, 2).—‘He should marry a girl who has no common Ṛṣi (as
her ancestor).........; nor one who is in the seventh grade among his
paternal and in the fifth grade among his maternal relations.’

*Bodhāyana* (2. 1. 38).—‘If he unknowingly marries a girl who is of the
same *gotra* as his mother, he should maintain her as his mother; if he
has got a child from her, he should perform the following
expiation.........’

*Viṣṇu* (24.9-10).—‘He should obtain a wife who is not the same *gotra*
as himself nor with the same *Pravara-ṛṣis*; and who is beyond the fifth
grade of his maternal, and beyond the seventh grade of his paternal
relations.’

*Viṣṇu* (*Aparārka*, p. 82).—‘Those who marry within the seventh and
fifth grades, and the children of such marriages, become outcasts and
Śūdras.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.53).—‘The girl who is free from disease, has a brother,
and does not belong to the same *gotra* or the same Ṛṣis, and who is
above the fifth and seventh grades of relationship on the maternal and
paternal sides respectively.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3.4.4,5).—‘The girl who does not belong to the
same *gotra*, and who is not his mother’s *sapiṇḍa*.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (37).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Śātātapa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 590).—‘First of all there should be purity
regarding *gotra* and *pravara*, and then that regarding the fifth and
seventh grades of relationship.’

*Baudhāyana* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 590).—‘One born of a woman of the same
*gotra* as her husband is a Caṇḍāla.’

*Śātātapa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘If one marries the daughter of his
maternal uncle, or a girl who is of the same *gotra* as his mother, or
of the same *pravara*,—he should renounce her and perform the Cāndrāyaṇa
penance.’

*Sumanta* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683, Aparārka, p. 80).—‘Having married the
daughter of his father’s sister, or that of his mother’s sister, or one
who is of the same *gotra* as his mother, or of the same *pravara*,—one
should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa; he shall give her up, but support her.’

*Sumanta* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘Girls are unmarriageable up to the
seventh grade on the father’s side, and up to the fifth grade on the
other sides.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘Some people hold that one should not
marry a girl who has the same *gotra* as his mother.’

*Kāṭhaka Gṛhya* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘One should not marry a girl
who has the same *gotra* and the same *pravara* as his father, nor one
who is of the same *gotra* as his mother.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 684).—‘One should avoid a girl
who, as regards his father, is of the same *gotra* or of the same
*pravara*; but as regards his mother, only one who has the same *gotra*
(the sameness of *pravara* in this latter case does not matter).’

*Pāraskara* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘*Jñāti*-relationship
extends to the seventh grade, or to the tenth.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘From the seventh or the
tenth grade extends the *Jñāti*-relationship.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘On the father’s and on the
mother’s side, the *sapiṇḍatā* (consanguinity) ceases beyond the seventh
and the fifth grades of relationship respectively.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 703).—‘One should select a girl
who has no *pravara-* sage in common with him,—avoiding seven grades on
the father’s and five on the mother’s side.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘In marriage one should
avoid three grades on the mother’s side and five grades on the
father’s.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘One shall select a girl who
has been found to be endowed with the three qualifications, and he
should avoid seven grades on his father’s, and five on his mother’s
side.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 407).—‘Within the seventh and the
fifth grades of relationship from the father and the mother
respectively—a girl is unmarriageable; as also one who has the same
*gotra or pravara*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘The householder shall
marry a girl who is in the fifth grade on his mother’s side and in the
seventh on the father’s.’

*Ślokavaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘One should marry the
girl who is the seventh on his father’s side and fifth on his mother’s
side.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘O king, the
householder shall marry, in the proper form, a girl who is fifth on his
mother’s side and seventh on his father’s side.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704),—‘One shall acquire rightfully
a wife, who is not born of the same *gotra* or the same *pravara* as
himself,—and who happens to he the fifth on mother’s and seventh on the
father’s side.’

*Manu and Viṣṇu* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘*Sapiṇḍatā* ceases
in the seventh grade.’

*Chaturviṁshatimata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 704).—‘On both sides, one
should marry the girl in the third and the fourth grades.’

*Saṭtṛṁshanmata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 704).—‘Manu has declared that
one may marry the girl who is in the third grade on the mother’s side
and in the third grade on the father’s side.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	A damsel who is neither a Sapinda on the mother's side, nor belongs to the same family on the father's side, is recommended to twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union.
</details>
