+++
title = "008 नोद्वहेत् कपिलाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should hot marry a maiden with tawny hair, nor one with superfluous limbs, nor one who has disease, nor one who has either no hair or too much hair, nor one who is garrulous, nor one with reddish eyes.—(8)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वः कुलाश्रयः प्रतिषेधः । अयं तु स्वरूपाश्रयः । यस्या कद्रुवर्णाः[^४८] कनकवर्णा वा केशाः सा **कपिला** । **अधिकाङ्गी** षडङ्गुलिः । **रोगिणी** बहुरोगा दुष्प्रतिकारव्याधिगृहीता च । भूम्नीनिः[^४९] मत्वर्थीयो नित्ययोगे वा । **अलोमिका** अकेशा । लोमानि केशा अप्य् उच्यन्ते । बाहुमध्ये जङ्घाद्वये वा सर्वलोम्नाम् अभावः । **वाचाला** स्वल्प एव वक्तव्ये बहुलं परुषं च भाषते । **पिङ्गला** अक्षिरोगेण मण्डलाक्षी कपिलपिङ्गलाक्षी वा ॥ ३.८ ॥


[^४९]:
     M G: bhūmnīni


[^४८]:
     M G 1st ed.: asuvarṇāḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The prohibition in the preceding verse was with regard to the family of
the bride; while that in the present verse pertains to her body.

The girl whose hairs are of either tawny or golden colour is called
‘*kapilā*.’

‘*With superfluous limbs*’—*e.g*., having six fingers.

‘*Who has disease*’—who is suffering from many diseases, or is overtaken
by some incurable disease;—the possessive affix having the sense of
*many* or Of *permanence*.

‘*Who has no hair*’—‘*loman*’— standing for *hairs* in general also.
What the present qualification has in view, however, is the entire
absence of hair in the arm-pits and between the thighs.

‘*Garrulous*’—who talks much and disagreeably, when it is necessary to
speak very little.

‘*With reddish eyes*’—Whose eyes are red, on account of some
disease.—(8)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 731) in support of
the view that one should not many a girl with defects;—it explains
‘*vācāṭā*’ as ‘garrulous’ and ‘*piṅgalā*’ as ‘with reddish eyes.’

*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 149) quotes it and adds that the defects here
described do not deprive the girl, if married, of the character of the
‘lawful wife,’ as visible (physical) defects can mean only physical
disabilties, and cannot affect the nonphysical spiritual or moral
character of anything.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 120), where
‘*rogiṇī*’ is explained as ‘suffering from epilepsy and such diseases,’
and ‘*vācāṭām*’ ‘as one who talks much of improper things,’—and not
simply as ‘garrulous’, which is the explanation of the same author in
another place \[Saṃskāra-prakāśa, p. 731, see first note above\];—also
in *Aparārka* (p. 78) to the effect that one should not many a girl who
is not endowed with the proper marks;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 74);—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 510), which explains ‘*kapilām*’, as ‘of the
colour of red lice,’ and ‘*piṅgalā*’ as ‘of the colour of fire:’—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 200), which explains ‘*vācāṭā*’ as
‘garrulous,’ and *piṅgalā*’ as ‘with tawny eyes;’—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 50a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.8-9)**

*Viṣṇu* (24.12-16).Not one who is diseased or with excessive limbs; or
with deficient limbs; nor one who is too pale, or too talkative.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 3).—‘One who is free from disease and has a brother.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (34).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘Too hort (short?), too tall,
too thin, too fat, with tawny eyes, too pale,—such girls should not he
accepted.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘The wise man shall not
marry a girl who hears signs of a beard, who has a masculine appearance,
whose voice is cracked, who speaks insinuatingly, whose voice is like
the crow’s, who looks on without, winking, whose eyes arc defective;—he
shall not marry her whose thighs arc hairy, whose ankles are high, in
whose, cheeks there are dimples;—he shall, not marry a girl whose skin
is rough, who is pale, who is diseased, or with red eyes, or with lean
hands and feet,—or one who is dwarfish, or too tall, or one whose
eye-brows arc joined: nor one whose teeth have many holes, nor one with
a frightful face.’

*Āpastamba* (Vīramitrodaya-Sarṃskāra, p. 532).—‘One named after an
asterism, or after a river, or after a tree is not commended; one should
avoid one whose name contains the consonants *r* or *l* or *gh* or *jh*
or *ḍh* or *ḍh* or *bh*.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Satṃskāra)—‘In selecting a wife one should avoid
one named after a Veda, or a river, or a mountain or a Gandharva, or an
asterism, or a tree, or a creeper.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

008	Let him not marry a maiden (with) reddish (hair), nor one who has a redundant member, nor one who is sickly, nor one either with no hair (on the body) or too much, nor one who is garrulous or has red (eyes),
</details>
