+++
title = "010 अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं सौम्य-नाम्नीम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should marry a female with a faultless body, bearing an agreeable name, having her gait like that of the swan or the elephant, having fine hair on the body and the head, and fine teeth, and with tender limbs.—(10)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं**[^५१] ।** **अव्यङ्गान्य् अङ्गानि यस्या सैवम् उच्यते । अव्यङ्गशब्दो ऽवैकल्यवचनः, प्रवीणोदारादिशब्दवद् यद्य् अपि[^५२] व्युत्पाद्यते ऽविकलान्य् अङ्गानि यस्येति, अतश् चाङ्गशब्दस्य द्वितीयस्यावयविनि शक्तौचित्येन, संस्थानस्य परिपूर्णता साव्यङ्गशब्देनोच्यते । **सौम्यं** मधुरं **नाम** । "स्त्रीणां सुखोद्यम्" (म्ध् २.३३) अत्र दर्शितम् । **हंस** इव **वारण** इव गच्छति । यादृशी हंसानां हस्तिनां च विलासवती मन्थरा गतिर् यस्याः । **तनु**शब्दो नाल्पवचनः किं तर्ह्य् आनुपरिमाणे[^५३] वर्तते । तन्वङ्गी सोच्यते या[^५४] नातिस्थूला नातिकृशेति । **मृदूनि** सुस्पर्षाकठिनापरुषाण्य् अङ्गानि यस्याः सा । ताम् **उद्वहेत् स्त्रियं** कन्याधिकारात् कन्याम् । 


[^५४]:
     M G 1st ed omit: yā; G 2nd ed.: sā


[^५३]:
     M G 1st ed.: ānuparibhāve


[^५२]:
     M G: yady api


[^५१]:
     M G omit: avyaṅgāṅgīṃ

- <u>यद्य् एवं</u> नालोमिकाम् इत्यादिप्रतिषेधो ऽनर्थको ऽस्माद् एव विधानात् या नैवंरूपा तस्या अविवाह्यता सिद्धा । 

- <u>सत्यम्</u> एवम् । एक एवार्थो द्वाभ्यां विधिमुखेन प्रतिषेधमुखेन चोद्यमानस् तु स्पष्टो बुध्यते । 

- कन्याशब्दश् चात्र प्रकरणाद् अननुभूतसंभोगासु स्त्रीषु प्रवर्तते । तथा च वसिष्ठः- "अस्पृष्टमैथुनां सदृशीं भार्यां विन्देत" (वध् ८.१) इति । न चान्येन संस्कृतान्येन पुनः संस्कर्तुं शक्या, कृतस्य करणाभावात् । अतश् चोढाया अप्रवृत्तभर्तृसंयोगायाः कथंचित् स्वैरिणीत्वे भर्तृप्रवासादिना नान्येन विवाहो ऽस्ति सत्य् अपि कन्यात्वे । तथा चेदृशी वसिष्ठोक्तिर् मध्ये पठिता । अन्यत्राप्य् उक्तम्- "अनन्यपूर्वां यवीयसीं भ्रातृमतीं स्त्रियम् उद्वहेत" इति (च्ड़्। य्ध् १.५२) ॥ ३.१० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One whose body is free from defects is called ‘*avyaṅgāṅgī*;’ the term
‘*avyaṇga*’ standing for *freedom from defects*; just like such other
words as ‘*pravīṇa*,’ ‘*udāra*,’ and the rest. Since the term
‘*avyaṅga*,’ etymologically, means ‘free from defects in the limbs,’ the
second ‘*aṇga*’ must be taken as standing for the *whole body*; hence
the epithet ‘*avyatiya*’ denotes *fulness or comeliness of the bodily
form*.

‘*Saumya*,’ ‘agreeable’—it has been laid down in this book that the
names of women should be sweet-sounding and easy to pronounce.

She who moves like the swan or the elephant. That is, one whose gait is
as elegant and languid as that of the swan or the elephant.

The term ‘*tanu*,’ ‘*fine*,’ here does not stand for ‘*small*;’ it means
moderate. Just as the girl who is neither fat nor leau is called
‘*tanvaṅgī*,’ ‘one with a fine body.’

‘*Mṛdvaṇgī* is one whose limbs are *tender*, not hard or rough.

Such a female ‘*one should marry*.’ ‘*Female*’ here must be taken to
stand for the *maiden*, as it is the maiden that is being spoken of in
the context.

“If that is so (if this verse also refers to the *maiden*), then the
prohibition contained in verse 8 regarding ‘one who has no hair, &c.,’
is superfluous; as the positive injunction, contained in the present
verse, implies that ‘one who is not as here described should not be
married.’”

True, that is so; the same fact when stated by means of two
verses—affirmatively in one and negatively in the other—becomes clearly
understood.

In the present context, the term ‘maiden’ is used in the sense of a
woman who has not experienced sexual intercourse. Says Vaśiṣṭha—‘One
should acquire a wife who has had no sexual intercourse and who is
similar to himself.’ But one who has been ‘consecrated’ (by marriage) by
one man is no longer capable of being ‘consecrated’ by another; as there
can be no doing of what has been already done. So that, if a girl has
been married, and her husband goes away before she has had intercourse
with him,—if she happens to be a loose woman, she cannot be married to
another person, even though she is still a ‘*maiden*’ (in the technical
sense); and it is such a maiden that is mentioned in the words of
Vaśiṣṭha quoted above. In another work also it is said—‘One should marry
a female, never before married by another person, who is younger than
himself and has brothers’ (Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra* 52).—(10)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 731) as setting
forth the external signs of a marriageable girl;—also in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Lakṣaṇa, p. 118) to the same effect;—and in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 132)
as setting forth the external signs; and for the *internal* signs it
refers to Āśvalāyana who has prescribed the following method;—eight
balls should be made of clay brought from eight different places, and
after some incantations have been uttered over them, the girl should be
asked to pick up one of them; (1) if she picks up that made of clay from
fields with rich corn growing, it is a sign that she would have progeny
rich in grains; (2) if she picks up that of clay brought from the
cattle-shed, she will be rich in cattle; (3) if that of clay from the
altar, she will be an expounder of Brahman;—(4) if that of clay from a
lake that is never dry, she will be endowed with all riches; (5) if that
from the gambling den, she will be crafty;—(6) if that from the
road-crossing, she will be inclined to wander about; (7) if that from
barren soil, she will be unlucky; (8) and if that from the crematoriuûi,
she will destroy her husband.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 78);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 74)
as laying down the external signs of a marriageable girl;—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 509) which explains ‘*tanulomakeśadaśanā*’ as
‘one the hair on whose chest is scanty, and whose hair and teeth are
fine’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 200);—and in *Nṛsiṃha-prasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 50a).

‘*Putrikādharmaśaṅkayā*’—‘For fear of her having the character of the
Appointed Daughter’ (Medhātithi);—‘For fear (in the former case) of her
being an Appointed Daughter, and (in the latter) of committing a sin’
(Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda, and ‘others’ in Medhātithi).
Govindarāja adopts Medhātithi’s explanation so far as this phrase is
concerned; but he gives a somewhat different explanation of the first
half of the verse, which according to him, would mean ‘one should not
marry a girl who has no brother, *or* whose father is not known’,—the
two contingencies being independent; while according to Medhātithi, the
second clause (‘whose father is not known’) is subordinate to the
former,—the meaning being that the doubt regarding the girl being an
‘appointed daughter’ would arise if there were no brother, *and* if the
father were not known; for he adds “if the father is known, there is no
fear of the girl being an Appointed Daughter, as he will himself declare
whether or not she has been ‘appointed’.”

According to Medhātithi, therefore, in the translation of the verse, we
should have ‘and’ instead of ‘*or*’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 474), which adds
the following notes:—He shall not many a girl with regard to whom it is
not known whether or not her father has the intention of making her an
‘appointed daughter;’—the sense is that where there is no fear of this,
one may marry the girl, even though she has no brother. The clause ‘*na
vijñāyeta vā pitā*’ (which, according to this explanation, means ‘*the
intentions* of whose father are not known’) implies that it is possible
for the daughter to be ‘appointed’ even without the Father making an
agreement to that effect with the bridegroom;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
82), which adds that this implies that the daughter can be ‘appointed,’
even without express agreement and declaration.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 746), where it
is explained as meaning that ‘one should not marry a girl with regard to
whose father it is not known whether or not he has the intention of
making her an Appointed Daughter’; and it adds that it is shown by this
that according to all the sages a daughter can become ‘appointed’ even
without being openly declared to be so;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
414), which explains the meaning to be that one should not marry the
girl with regard to whom it is not known if her father intends to
‘appoint’ her; and adds the same note as *Saṃskāramayūkha*.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 136) quotes this verse and reproduces the same
explanation as above, and deduces the conclusion that ‘one should marry
the girl in whose case there is no fear of this.’

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 699) quotes the verse and adds that ‘in a case
where there is no fear of the father having an intention of making the
girl an Appointed Daughter, one may marry the girl, even though she may
have no brother.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 80) as indicating that it is
possible for a daughter to be ‘appointed’ secretly; without her being
married under that expressed agreement;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra
p. 181), which adds the same note as *Saṃskāraratnamālā*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghu-Āśvalāyana* (15. 2).—‘After due examination, ho shall select a
girl who is horn of a good family, has a pleasing face, nice limbs, nice
clothes and of agreeable looks, who has beautiful eyes and is handsome.’

*Śātātapa*. (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘One shall select a girl
who has the voice of the swan, complexion like the clouds and eyes of
the tawny colour of honey.’

*Āpastamba* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra).—‘One shall marry a girl who has
relations, good character, and auspicious marks, and who is free from
disease.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

010	Let him wed a female free from bodily defects, who has an agreeable name, the (graceful) gait of a Hamsa or of an elephant, a moderate (quantity of) hair on the body and on the head, small teeth, and soft limbs.
</details>
