+++
title = "011 यस्यास् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wise man shall not mabry one who has no brother, or whose father is not known; for fear of her having the character of the “appointed daughter.”—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस्या भ्राता नास्ति तां न विवहेत् । **पुत्रिकाधर्मशङ्कया** पुत्रिकात्वशङ्कया । पुत्रिकाधर्मः कदाचिद् अस्याः कृतो भवेत् पित्रेत्य् अनया शङ्कया अनेन संदेहेन । 

- कथं चेयं शङ्का भवति ।

- **यदि न विज्ञायेत पिता**, देशान्तरे प्रोषितो मृतो वा । सा च मात्रा पितृसपिण्डैर् वा दीयते । प्राप्तकाला पितर्य् असंनिहित एतैर् अपि दातव्येति स्मर्यते । स्मृतिं चोत्तरत्र दर्शयिष्यामः । पितरि तु संविज्ञयमाने नास्ति पुत्रिकात्वशङ्का । स हि स्वयम् एवाह "कृता वा न कृता वा" इति । **वा**शब्दश् चेच् छब्दार्थे द्रष्टव्यः । यदि पिता न विज्ञायेत तदा कन्यका न वोढव्या । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु स्वतन्त्रम् एतत् प्रतिषेधद्वयम् आचक्षते । यदि[^५५] **पिता न विज्ञायेत,**[^५६] अननेयं जातेति, गूढोत्पन्नायाः प्रतिषेधः । एवं च संबन्धः । **यस्या भ्राता नास्ति** तां पुत्रिकात्वशङ्कया **नोपयच्छेत** । **न विज्ञायेत**[^५७] इत्य् अत्र पुत्रिकाशङ्कयेत्य् एतन् न संबध्यते । 


[^५७]:
     M G: vijñāyata


[^५६]:
     M G: vijñāyate


[^५५]:
     M G: yady api

- अस्मिन् प्रकरणे यत्र नास्ति दृष्टगतः प्रतिषेधः यथा "असपिण्डा च" (म्ध् ३.५) इत्य् अत्र श्लोके, तदतिक्रमे विवाहस्वरूपानिर्वृत्तिर् एव । अतः सगोत्रादिविवाहः कृतो ऽप्य् अकृत एव । विध्यवगमरूपत्वाद् आधानवद् विवाहस्य विध्यतिक्रमरूपाद् अपगमात्[^५८] । यथाधानविधौ यत् किंचिद् अङ्गं न ज्ञातं तदभावे नाहवनीयादिनिवृत्तिः, एवं सगोत्रादिकाया[^५९] न भार्यात्वम् । तस्मात् त्याज्यैव कृततादृशसंस्कारप्रतिरूपिकापि[^६०] । तत्रभवन्तो वसिष्ठादयः प्रायश्चित्तम् अपि स्मरन्ति तादृशविवाहे । यद्य् अपि कर्मण एव तदङ्गप्रतिषेधातिक्रमे वैगुण्यम्, न साक्षात् पुरुषस्य दोषः, तथापि वाचनिकं प्रायश्चित्तम् । अथ वा सगोत्रागमनं निषिद्धम् । तदर्थे व्यापारे प्रवर्तमाने यद् उक्तं तत् प्रायश्चित्तं भवेत् । 


[^६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: kṛtā tādṛśa-


[^५९]:
     M G: asagotrādikāyā


[^५८]:
     M G: avagamāt

- यस् तु हीनक्रियादिप्रतिषेधस् तस्य दृष्टदर्शनमूलत्वान् निर्वर्तते विवाहः, भवत्य् असौ भार्या, नास्ति तस्यास् त्यागः । एवमर्थ एव "महन्त्य् अपि" (म्ध् ३.६) इति पूर्वस्मात् प्रतिषेधाद् भेदः स्तवनार्थं पठितः । एवम् एव च शिष्टसमाचारः । कदाचित् कपिलादिरूपां उपयच्छति न सगोत्राम् ॥ ३.११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

She who has no brother,—such a girl one should not marry,—‘*for fear of
her having, the character of the appointed daughter*;’ *i.e*., by reason
of her being an ‘appointed daughter;’ *i.e*., by reason of there being
the doubt that the girl’s father might have performed those rites that
would have made her an ‘appointed daughter.’

“Why should such a doubt arise at all?”

Such a doubt would arise if the girl’s father is not known, having died
or having gone away to a foreign country. Under such circumstances, the
girl is given away in marriage either by her mother or by other members
of her father’s family. Since it is laid down that when the girl has
reached the marriageable age, if her father happen to be absent, she
shall be given away in marriage by the said relations.’ The exact rule
on this point we shall quote later on. If the father is known, however,
there is no fear of the girl being an ‘appointed daughter as he will
himself declare whether or not she has been ‘appointed.’

‘*Or*’ in the text should be taken in the sense of ‘if;’ the sense being
that ‘if the father is not known, the girl should not be married.’

Others have taken the two clauses as formulating two independent
prohibitions: (a) ‘If the father is not known’—*i.e*., if it is not
known from whom she is born; this being a prohibition of marrying the
girl of unknown parentage;—and (*b*) the next prohibition is to be
construed as ‘one should not marry the girl who has no brother, for fear
of her being an appointed daughter.’ They further point out that the
latter phrase, ‘for fear of her being an appointed daughter,’ cannot be
construed with the clause, ‘if her father is not known.’

In the whole of this section on Marriage, wherever the prohibition is
not based upon grounds that are not perceptible—*e.g*., ‘one should
marry a maiden who is not his father’s *sapiṇḍa*,’ etc., (when the
grounds of interdiction are trascendental, not perceptible, as in the
case of the prohibition of marriage with a diseased girl, etc.),—if the
prohibition is disobeyed, the ‘marriage’ itself remains unaccomplished.
Hence, if one happens to marry a girl belonging to the same *gotra* as
himself, the marriage, even though performed, would be as good as *not
performed*; and this for the simple reason that the character of
‘marriage’ is determined by scriptural injunction,—just like the
character of the ‘Fire-laying’ rite; and, hence, a transgression of the
injunction means the non-accomplishment of -the Rite. In the case of
Fire-laying, it is found that if there is omission of any subsidiary
detail, the *Āhavanīya*’ and other ‘Fires’ are not accomplished;
similarly, a girl that belongs to the same ‘*gotra*’ as a man can never
become the ‘wife’ of that man. Hence it has been ordained that such a
girl, even though she may have gone through the sacramental rites, shall
be given up. Further, in connection with such marriages, Vaśiṣṭha and
other revered writers have prescribed specie lexpiratory rites. Even
though, in reality, what each a marriage involves is only a discrepancy
in the Rite caused by the transgression of one of the interdictions
relating to a subsidiary detail,—and it does not involve any sin on the
part of the man,—yet the Expiratory Rite has to be performed, in view of
its being directly enjoined by the scriptures. Or, we may take it thus
that what is prohibited is ‘intercourse’ with a girl of the same
‘*gotra*,’ and the Expiatory Rite relates to the series of acts
perpetrated by the man (in the form of the marriage-ceremonies.)

As regards the prohibition of marriage with girls belonging to families
that may have dropped the sacred rites and so forth,—it is based upon
perceptible grounds; and, hence, when such girls are married, the
‘marriage’ is duly accomplished, the girl actually becomes the man’s
‘wife,’ and she shall not be given up. It is in view of this fact that
in verse 6, we have the laudatory epithet ‘even though they be great,’
which draws a line of distinction between the two sets of prohibitions.
Such also is the custom among all cultured people: they do occasionally
marry girls ‘with tawny hair,’ etc., but never one that belongs to the
same gotra.—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 474).—‘According to some people the
daughter becomes *appointed* by the mere intention of the father (to
that effect); hence as there could always be a suspicion regarding this,
one should not marry a girl who has no brother.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.53).—‘One who has a brother and is free from disease,
etc.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (36).—\[Reproduces Manu\],

*Likhita* (51)—\[Reproduces Manu\].

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 531).—‘One shall marry a girl
who has her father, mother and brother and is endowed with all suitable
qualities, etc., etc.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

011	But a prudent man should not marry (a maiden) who has no brother, nor one whose father is not known, through fear lest (in the former case she be made) an appointed daughter (and in the latter) lest (he should commit) sin.
</details>
