+++
title = "012 सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For ‘twice-born men’ a girl of equal caste has been recommended for the first marriage-sacrament. For those, however, who take to it through mere desire, these (following) should be regarded as preferable in due order.—(12)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"उद्वहेत द्विजो भार्याम्" (म्ध् ३.४) इति सत्य् अपि द्वितीयानिर्देशे भार्यायाः प्रधानत्वे गुणकर्मत्वे च[^६१] विवाहस्य विवक्षितम् एकत्वम्, अनुवादगतोद्देश्यत्वात्, यथा यूपं छिनत्तीति । यस्यान्यतः स्वरूपम् अवगतं तस्यान्यत्र कार्यान्तरविधानार्थम् अनूद्यमानस्य यथावगतस्वरूपस्यैवानुवादो भवति, यथा गृहं संमार्ष्टीति, पूर्वावगतिसापेक्षत्वाद् अनुवादस्य । निर्ज्ञातसंख्याका हि ग्रहा, "दश एतान् अध्वर्युः प्रातःसवने ग्रहान् गृह्णाति" इत्यादिवाक्यैः, कार्यं चवगतं ग्रहैर् जुहोतीति । अतो ऽवगत्यन्तरापेक्षत्वाद् ग्रहशब्दस्य न विवक्ष्यते संख्या । इह तु भार्यालक्षणो ऽर्थो नान्यतः सिद्धो ऽस्माद् एव वाक्याद् अवगन्तव्यो ऽतो यथाश्रुति प्रतीयते, प्रातिपदिकार्थवत् संख्यापि विवक्षितेति । पञ्चमे चैतद् विस्तरतस् तर्केण वक्ष्यते । 


[^६१]:
     M G 1st ed.: ca guṇakarmatve

- स्थितायां संख्याविवक्षायां द्वितीयस्याः कृते ऽपि पाणिग्रहणे न भार्यात्वम् । यथा सत्य् आवहनीये न द्वितीय आहवनीयः । इष्यते च क्वचिन् निमित्ते भार्यान्तरपरिग्रहस् तदर्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्य गौतमीये पठितम्- "धर्मप्रजासंपन्ने दारे नान्यां कुर्वीत, अन्यतरापाये तु कुर्वीत" (=आप्ध् २.११.१२) इति ।

- **सवर्णा** समानजातीया । सा तावद् **अग्रे** प्रथमतो ऽकृतविजातीयदारपरिग्रहस्य[^६२] **प्रशस्ता** । कृते सवर्णाविवाहे यदि तस्यां कथंचित् प्रीतिर् न भवति, अथ वापत्त्यार्थो[^६३] व्यापारो न निष्पद्यते तदा कामहेतुकायां प्रवृत्ताव् इमा वक्ष्यमाणाः सवर्णावराः श्रेष्ठाः शास्त्रात् तु ज्ञातव्याः । अत एकत्वस्य सवर्णानियमस्य चायम् अपवादः ।


[^६३]:
     M G 1st ed.: kṛtāvapattyārtho


[^६२]:
     M G 1st ed.: prathamataḥ kṛta-

- <u>ननु</u> च सवर्णाविवाहे पारतन्त्र्यं प्रतीयते । न सवर्णाया बहुत्वं ।

- <u>एकत्वसंख्यातिक्रमस्</u> तावत् प्रतीयते । असवर्णाभ्यनुज्ञानेनाप्य् अतिक्रान्तं चेत् कः सवर्णाया निषेधकः । तथा गौतमेनाविशेषेणैव पठितम्- "अन्यतरापाये तु कुर्वीत" ( = आप्ध् २.११.१२) इति । उत्तरश्लोके "सा च स्वा च" इति सवर्णाविवाहो ऽस्ति ॥ ३.१२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In verse 4, we had the words ‘the twice-born person should take a wife,’
where the *wife* has been spoken of by means of a word ending in the
Accusative, which makes the *wife* th e *primary*, and the *marriage*
the *secondary*, object; and yet the singular number (in ‘wife’) is
meant to be duly significant; since it forms part of the predicate of
the sentence; just as we have in the case of the assertion, ‘he cuts the
*sacrificial post*.’ In the case of a thing whose character is
determined and known from other sources,—if such a thing happens to be
referred to in connection with the Injunction of some other act, it is
always understood to be referred to exactly in the form in which it has
been known; *e.g*., in the case of the injunction, ‘wash the cup;’ and
this for the simple reason that all ‘references’ are based upon wḥat is
previously known. Thus, in connection with the ‘cups,’ their *number* is
already known from such statements as ‘at the morning-extraction the
Adhvaryu takes up *ten* cups;’ their use also is already known from the
statement, ‘libations are poured with the cups;’ hence, in the
subsequent statement, ‘wash the *cup*,’ no significance is attached to
the singular number in the word ‘cup,’—this statementbeing construed in
connection with what is already known about it. In the present instance,
on the other hand, the thing concerned—the ‘wife’—is one whose character
has not been determined anywhere else; in fact, it is only from the
present text that we derive our knowledge of what the ‘wife’ is: hence,
we understand it exactly as it is here described; so that due
significance is to be attached to the number, just as much as to the
basic noun itself. All this we shall discuss with detailed arguments
under discourse V.

Thus then, due significance being attached to the (singular) number (in
the word ‘wife,’ as used in verse 4),—if one happens to marry a second
time, even though the marriage-rites might be duly performed, she does
not become a ‘wife;’ just as when one *Āhavanīya* is already there, the
second fire, even though duly kindled, does not become ‘*Āhavanīya*.’
But, under certain circumstances, the taking of a second wife is
considered desirable; and it is in connection with this second marriage
that we have the rules propounded in this and the following verses. It
is in view of this that Gautama has said—‘If one’s wife is endowed with
virtue and offspring, one should not take another; in the event of
failure on either of the two points, one may have another.’

‘*Of equal caste*,’—*i.e*., of the same caste.

‘*For the first*,’—first of all; *i.e*., for one who has not taken a
wife from a different caste; ‘*has been recommended*.’

Having married a girl of his own caste, if the man finds that she does
not inspire his love; or if the act of child-begetting is not
fulfilled,—then there comes about the man’s desire for another wife; and
then *these*—going to be mentioned below—‘*are to be regarded as
preferable*’— superior—on the strength of the scriptures.

This, then, is an exception to the rule regarding having only *one*
wife, as also to that of having a wife from one’s own caste.

*Objection*:— “The restriction appears to be upon the taking of a second
wife from one’s own caste; as the plurality (of wives) does not appear
to be sanctioned regarding girls of one’s own caste.”

*Answer*—All that the present text permits is the exceeding of the
number ‘one.’ And, if what is sanctioned is the exceeding of it by means
of marrying a girl of a different caste,—what is there that would
prevent one’s marrying (again) a second girl of his own caste? It is for
this reason that what Gautama has declared applies equally to all—‘if
there is failure in regard to either of the two, one may take another
wife.’ In the following verse also we read, ‘she and *one of his own
caste*,’ where also the second wife from one’s own caste is
permitted.—(12).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted by Jīmūtavāhana (Dāyabhāga, p. 209);—and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 143) as providing permissible substitutes for the
proper ‘wife’;—it explains ‘*avarāḥ*’ (which it reads in place of
‘*varāḥ*’) as *jaghanyāḥ*, ‘lower’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 98), which
adds the following notes:—There are three classes of Marriage—(1) for
Dharma, (2) for offispring and (3) for physical pleasure; that for
offspring is obligatory, and for this one should have a girl of the same
caste as himself; and in that for Pleasure, or for avoiding the sin of
not entering the second life-stage, one may have girls of other castes,
even a Śūdra girl; in the former also, if no girl of the same caste is
available, girls of other castes may be taken.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
747), which adds the following explanations:—The term ‘*varṇa*’ stands
for *caste*;—‘*agre*’ means *the first marriage*;—the term ‘*dvijāti*’
indicates also persons born of the Śūdra through mixed marriages,
‘natural’ as well as ‘inverse—‘*praśastā*’ means that she is recommended
as the first and best alternative for taking a wife for the purposes of
(1) enjoyment, (2) begetting a son and (3) helping in religious acts
(these three being ‘*dārakarma*’ the *function of the wife*).

This is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 493), where we have
the following notes:—‘*Agre*’ means ‘at the first marriage of the
Accomplished Student.’;—‘*dārakarmaṇi*’—for the performance of the
Agnihotra and other rites;—‘*Savarṇā*’—‘she who has the same caste as
the bridegroom’ is recommended;—*i.e*., the Brāhmaṇī for the Brāhmaṇa,
the Kṣatriyā for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya for the Vaiśya. Having, for
the sake of religious acts, married a girl of the same caste, if one is
desirous of ha ving more wives for purposes of physical enjoyment, he
may marry girls of lower castes (‘*avarāḥ*’) in due order;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 205), which says that the implication of
the text is that after one has married a girl of the same caste, he may
marry others of other castes also, but they will be less and less
desirable in order; this means that for the sake of Dharma one should
marry a girl of the same caste.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.12-13)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1. 8. 2-5)—‘For the Brāhmaṇa there are four wives, in the
order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya, there are three; for the Vaiśya,
two; for the Śūdra, one.’

*Viṣṇu* (21. 1-1).—\[Same as above.\]

*Viṣṇu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 191).—‘For the twice-born, the Śūdra wife
can serve no spiritual purpose; the only purpose she can serve is that
of lust and hence she has been permitted only for one who is blinded by
lust.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 57).—‘In the order of ṭhe castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya and for tho Vaiśya; for the
Śūdra, there is only the wife of the same caste.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1. 24-25).—‘In the order of the castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya, one each for the Vaiśya
and the Śūdra;—according to some people, the Shíidra girl may also he
married, but without mantras.’

*Pāraśara* (1.4. 8-1.1).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, there are three wives, in
the order of the castes;—two for the Kṣatriya;—one for the Vaiśya;—for
all, the Śūdra wife also, hut without mantras.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 747,).—‘For all men the first
alternative is to have a wife of the same caste as oneself.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the order of the castes,
the Brāhmaṇa may have four wives; the Kṣatriya, three; the Vaiśya, two;
the Śūdra, only one, the Śūdra.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the event of his not
obtaining a girl of the same caste as himself, the Brāhmaṇa may beget, a
son on a Kṣatriya wife, or on a Vaiśya wife, or according to some, on a
Śūdra wife.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘Apart from the Brāhmaṇa
wife, there are three wives, in the descending order of the castes; for
the Śūdra girl, there are (apart from the Śūdra husband), three husbands
in the ascending order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya there are two
wives, in addition to the one of his own caste; for the Vaiśya only one;
for the Vaiśya girl there are two husbands and for the Kṣatriya, one
only—in addition to that of her own caste.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

012	For the first marriage of twice-born men (wives) of equal caste are recommended; but for those who through desire proceed (to marry again) the following females, (chosen) according to the (direct) order (of the castes), are most approved.
</details>
