+++
title = "014 न ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिययोर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Under no circumstance whatsoever has a Śūdra wife been ordained for the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya,—even though these be placed in peril.—(14)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद्य् अप्य् अत्यन्तरूपवती शूद्रा, विप्रराजन्यौ च वीरप्रकृती दशमीम् अपि दशाम् अश्नुवीयातां तथापि शूद्रां नाधिवोढारौ । अत्रार्थवादः । **कस्मीम्श्चिद् अपि वृत्तान्ते** न क्वचिद् इतिहासोपाख्याने ऽप्य् **उपदिश्यते** वर्ण्यते । **आपदि** गरीयस्याम् अधिकायाम् आपदि । 

- पूर्वत्रानुज्ञातानेन प्रतिषिद्धा अतो विकल्पः ।

- <u>ननु</u> च शास्त्रलक्षणयोर् एकविषयसंनिपाते षोडशिग्रहणाग्रहणवद् विकल्पो युक्तो न तु रागलक्षणायाः प्रवृत्तेर् निषेधेन । न च शूद्रा शास्त्रलक्षणा । केवलं रागतस् तत्र प्रवृत्तिर् अप्रतिषिद्धेति पूर्वशास्त्रस्यार्थः । निषेधस् तु शास्त्रलक्षण इत्य् अविवाह्यैव शूद्रा । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्य याज्ञवल्क्येन पठितम् "यद् उच्यते द्विजातीनां शूद्रादारोपसंग्रहः । न तन् मम मतम्" इति (य्ध् १.५६) ।

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । सर्वत्रोपदेशानर्थकतयैव विकल्प आश्रीयते । यदि चात्यन्तम् एव शूद्राप्रतिषेधः स्यात् तदा क्षत्रियवैश्ये एव प्रतिप्रसूयेयाताम् आपद्य् अभ्यनुज्ञाने । प्रतिप्रसवशास्त्रम् (म्ध् ३.१३) अयं च प्रतिषेधः- द्वयम् अपि व्यर्थं स्यात् सवर्णाया नियमेन सिद्धत्वात् । तद् इदम् अनुज्ञातं प्रतिषेधश् च स्वं स्वं विरुध्यमाने विकल्प्येते[^६५] ।


[^६५]:
     M G 1st ed.: cāsvavirudhyamāne vikalpate

- <u>ननु</u> च विकल्पे कामचारः । तस्य च प्रतिप्रसवत एव सिद्धेः[^६६] प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यो नैव । 


[^६६]:
     M G 1st ed.: siddhaḥ

- न यथाकामतः क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् विवाह एवं शूद्रायाः, अन्यत्रापदो गरीयाः[^६७] । 


[^६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: garīyaḥ syāt

- इदं तु प्रतिपत्तुं युक्तं यत् सवर्णानियमेनासवर्णानिवृत्तेर् अर्थतः कृतायाः पुनः शूद्रानिवृत्तिर् असवर्णानिवृत्तेर् अनित्यत्वं ज्ञापयति । अनित्यत्वे चापदि सवर्णाया अलाभे वा भवति चायम् अवगमः "शूद्रा न वोढव्या इतरे तु वोढव्ये" ॥ ३.१४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even when the Śūdra girl is extremely handsome, and the *Brāhmaṇa* or
*Kṣatriya* bridegroom is in the ‘tenth stage’ of his life,—he should
never marry the Śūdra girl.

On this point, a descriptive phrase is added—‘*under no circumstance
whatsoever*’—*i.e*., in no story at all—‘*has been ordained*’—
described.

‘*In peril*’—Even in the greatest distress.

In the preceding verse, the *Śūdra* wife has been permitted, and here
she is prohibited. Hence there should be option.

“Option is permissible only when there is possibility of the two courses
being adopted at one and the same time, and both courses are equally
sanctioned by scriptural injunctions; and it cannot be permitted when a
course of action is open to one only under the influence of passion,
while it is prohibited by scripture. In the case in question, the taking
of a Śūdra wife is not sanctioned by scripture, it is possible only
under the influence of passion; and all that the foregoing verse means
is that the marriage of a Śūdra girl under the influence of passion is
not entirely prohibited; the prohibition, on the other hand (contained
in the present verse), is purely scriptural. Hence the conclusion is
that the *Śūdra* girl should not be married at all. It is in view of
this that Yājñavalkya (*Ācāra*, 56) has declared.—‘It is said that
twice-born persons may take Śūdra wives; but that is not my opinion.”’

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In all cases, option is admitted
only in view of the likely futility of the injunction (of one or the
other coarse of action). If the *Śūdra-wife* were absolutely prohibited,
then the *Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* girls alone would have been mentioned
as permitted (to the Brāhmaṇa) in times of peril; and in that case, the
counter-exception (mentioned in 13), as also the prohibition (contained
in 14), would both be superfluous; as the marrying of the girl of one’s
own caste would have been already secured by the restrictive rule. Thus,
then, since there is a clear incompatibility between the sanction (in
13) and the prohibition (in 14), the two should be regarded as optional
alternatives.

“The presence of an option means that the agent may do what he likes;
and, as the marrying of the Śūdra girl (if one wishes to do so) would be
already secured by the counter-exception (in 13), there would be no need
for putting forward the prohibition (in 14) \[as the not-marrying of the
Śūdra girl is already deduced, from the general rule of marrying within
one’s own caste\].”

But the marrying of the *Śūdra* girl has not been left entirely to the
wish of the agent, in the way in which the marrying of *Kṣatriya* and
*Vaiśya* girls has been; in fact, it has not been permitted, except in
times of very great distress.

From all this the following conclusion appears the right one to
adopt:—The general rule regarding marrying a girl of one’s own caste
having already indicated, by implication, the impropriety of marrying
girls of other castes,—that the Śūdra girl should have been prohibited
again (in 14), already shows that the rule regarding not marrying girls
of other castes is not absolute; and since this rule is not absolute, it
follows that in times of difficulty, or in the event of not finding a
girl of his own caste, while the *Śūdra* girl shall never be married,
those of the other two castes may be married.—(14).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495) as
countenancing the view that it is better by far that the Brāhmaṇa and
the Kṣatriya should avoid a Śūdra wife altogether, even though he he
overpowered by lust;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 144), where the prohibition
herein contained is explained as referring to the *first*, marriage;—and
‘*āpat*’ is explained as ‘the contingency of not finding a girl of the
same caste’;—and it adds, on the strength of the next verse, that what
is here said is applicable to the Vaiśya also.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 749) quotes the verse and explains
‘*vṛttante*’ as ‘in a story.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 87), which adds that though the verse
mentions only the ‘Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya’ it does not mean that it
is permissible for the Vaiśya; all thaí is meant is that for the two
higher castes it is specially reprehensible;—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 205), which says that this prohibition is meant for the
*first* marriage, as is clear from the foregoing verses.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

014	A Sudra woman is not mentioned even in any (ancient) story as the (first) wife of a Brahmana or of a Kshatriya, though they lived in the (greatest) distress.
</details>
