+++
title = "023 षड् आनुपूर्व्या"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should know the first six in the order stated as lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, the last four for the Kṣatriya and those same, excepting the “Rākṣasa,” for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.—(23).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

षड् विवाहा ब्राह्मणस्य्**आनुपूर्व्या** । आनुपूर्वी क्रमः[^७५], नामोद्देशः क्रेमेण[^७६] । **क्षत्रस्य** । क्षत्रियवचनः क्षत्रशब्दः । तस्य **चतुरो ऽवरान्** उपरितनान् आसुरगान्धर्वराक्षसपैशाचान् **विद्यात्** । वैश्यशूद्रयोस् तान् एवार्**आक्षसान्** राक्षसं वर्जयित्वा ॥ ३.२३ ॥


[^७६]:
     M G: kramam


[^७५]:
     M G 1st ed.: kramaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first six forms of marriages, in the order in which they have been
named above, are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa.

The term ‘*Kṣatra*’ stands for the *Kṣatriya*. For him ‘*the last
four*;’ *i.e*., the ‘*Āsura*,’ the ‘*Gāndharva*,’ the ‘*Rākṣasa*,’ and
the *Paiśāca*.’

For the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*, ‘*those same, excepting the Rākṣasa*,’
*i.e*., leaving off the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form.—(23)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 987), which adds
the following explanation:—The six forms of marriage, from the
beginning, are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, the four beginning with ‘Āsura’
and ending with ‘Paiśāca’ for the Kṣatriya; these latter, with the
exception of the ‘Rākṣasa’ are lawful for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.

*Aparārka* (p. 91) quotes this and adds that those beginning with Brāhma
and ending with Gāndharva are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa; and the
‘*avarān*’—those named last are lawful for the Kṣatriya; and for the
Vaiśya and Śūdra also these same, excepting the Rākṣasa.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 158) quotes the verse and explains it to mean that
the first six—*i*. e., ‘Brāhma’, ‘Daiva’, ‘Ārṣa’, ‘Prājāpatya’, ‘Āsura’
and ‘Gāndharva’ are, in the order stated, ‘lawful’—*i.e*., not contrary
to law—for the Brāhmaṇa.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 858) quotes the verse and having offered
the same explanation as the above, adds that four of these are the
principal forms recommended, and the other two are only secondary
substitutes.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 223) quotes the verse and explains that the ‘four’
meant are Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa and Paiśāca; these, excepting the
Rākṣasa, are lawful for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.

It is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 100), which adds the following
explanation:—For the Brāhmaṇa, only six forms are commended, beginning
with the *Brāhma* and ending with the *Gāndharva*, the other two are not
commended;—the four beginning with the *Āsura* are lawful for the
Kṣatriya,—these same four, excepting Rākṣasa, for the Vaiśya and the
Śūdra;—thus Rākṣasa is lawful for the Kṣatriya only; so that for the
Brāhmaṇa there are only six, for the Kṣatriya all the eight;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 231), which also adds that only the first
six. are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, the latter four for the Kṣatriya, and
for the Vaiśya, and the Śūdra also, all these with the exception of the
Rākṣasa.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.23-24)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.10-14).—‘Of these, four are commended for the
Brāhmaṇa, of these the preceding being more commendable than the
succeeding; and of the remaining four, the succeeding is more
reprehensible than the preceding; of these again, the sixth and the
seventh are in keeping with the character of the *Kṣatriya*,—and the
fifth and the eighth for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra; because Vaiśyas and
Śūdras have no restrictions regarding their wives.’

*Śaṅkha* (4.3).—‘Among these the four mentioned first are lawful; the
Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa are commended for the Kṣatriya.’

*Gautama* (4.14, 15).—‘The first four are lawful; six, according to
some.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.27, 28).—‘Among these, the first four are lawful; the
Gāndharva also, for Kṣatriyas.’

*Āpastamba* (2. 12. 3).—‘Of these, the first three are commended, the
preceding being more commendable than the succeeding.’

*Mahābhārata* (Ādi-parva, 73, 12).—‘The Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa are
lawful for the Kṣatriya.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 859).—‘O Yudhiṣṭhira, for the
good Brāhmaṇas, the Brāhma form is the lawful one.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 859).—‘The first four are commended
for the Brāhmaṇa; the Gāndharva and the Rāksasa for the Kṣatriya, the
Āsura for the Vaiśya, and the Śūdra; the last one has been condemned.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 860).—‘The first four forms of
marriage are lawful, and conducive to water-libations; being free from
fees and fit for Brāhmaṇas, they save both families.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 487).—‘The first four are commended
for the Brāhmaṇa; the Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa for the Kṣatriya, the
Āsura for the Vaiśya and for the Śūdra; the eighth one is entirely
condemned.’

*Saṃvarta* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 487).—‘If a good girl be unobtainable by
any means, than she may be married even by theft, while she may be
alone.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Part 11, p. 13).—‘Of these the first four are righteous,
as authorised by the Father; the remaining (which are unrighteous) may
be authorised by the Father and the Mother (who accept the fees).’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

023	One may know that the first six according to the order (followed above) are lawful for a Brahmana, the four last for a Kshatriya, and the same four, excepting the Rakshasa rite, for a Vaisya and a Sudra.
</details>
