+++
title = "025 पञ्चानान् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Of the five, three have been declared to be lawful and two unlawful, in this treatise; the Paiśāca and the Āsura forms should never be adopted.’—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

क्षत्रियादिविषयेयं स्मृतिर् न ब्राह्मणविषया, राक्षसे विरोधात् । न हि वधभेदने ब्राह्मणः कर्तुम् अर्हति, अस्याचरणस्य क्षत्रियादिविषयतयोपपत्तेः । 

- **पञ्चानां तु** विवाहानां प्राजापत्यात् प्रभृति त्रयो विवाहा धर्म्याः[^७८] । द्वौ न कर्तव्यौ पैशाचश् चासुरश् च । प्राजापत्यः क्षत्रियादीनाम् अप्राप्तो ऽपि विधीयते, राक्षसो ऽपि वैश्यशूद्रयोः । आसुरपैशाचयोः प्रतिषेधः ।


[^७८]:
     M G 1st ed.: tayor vivāhau dharmyau

- इदम् अत्र व्यवस्था । ब्राह्मणस्य षड् विवाहाः । तत्र ब्राह्मः सर्वतः श्रेष्ठस् ततो न्यूनौ दैवप्राजापत्यौ ताभ्याम् अप्य् आर्षस् ततो ऽपि गान्धर्वस् ततो ऽप्य् आसुरः । 

- येषाम् अयं श्लोको ब्राह्मणविषयो ऽपि तेषां राक्षसो ऽपि ब्राह्मणस्य क्षत्रियवृत्ताव् अवस्थितस्य भवति । विकर्मस्थस्यापि वधभेदनाभ्यां प्रायश्चित्तियतो न तु[^७९] राक्षसो न विवाह इति ते मन्यन्ते । 


[^७९]:
     M G omit: na tu

- तत्र[^८०] ब्राह्मस्य श्रैष्ठ्यं फलेनैव दर्शितम् । निषेधाभावेन चेतरेषां त्रयाणां न्यूनता फलापचयवचनाद् एव । आसुरस्य पुनर् वैश्यशूद्रयोर् विधानेन परिसंख्या ब्राह्मणक्षत्रिययोः प्रतीयते । षड् इति च विधानम् । अतो विकल्पः । स च व्यवस्थया । इतरासंभवेन तस्याश्रयणं तुल्यम् । विकल्पो हि व्रीहियवद् अनेकविवाहविधानेन च समुच्च्यासंभवाद् एव सिद्धः । सति वा संभवे क्रियेत चेत् तथापि धर्मापत्ययोर् न्यूनफलो ऽसौ । 


[^८०]:
     M G 1st ed.: tad

- अथ क्षत्रियस्य राक्षसो मुख्यश् चतुर्भिः श्लोकैर् विकल्पेन विधानात् । चतुर इत्य् अनेनासुरगान्धर्वपैशाचा अपि, "राक्षसं क्षत्रियस्यैकम्" (म्ध् ३.२४) इत्य् अनेन ते प्रतिषिद्धः । अतो विकल्पिताः, न मुख्याः । प्रकृतापेक्षत्वाच् च राक्षसैकविधिः । प्राजापत्ये नास्ति परिसंख्यानम् । अतः प्राजापत्यो ऽपि क्षत्रियस्य राक्षसतुल्यः । 

- एवं वैश्यशूद्रयोर् अपि प्राजापत्यो नित्यवद् आम्नातो न प्रतिषिद्धः । आसुरपैशाचौ तु तयोर् विहितप्रतिषिद्धौ । राक्षसो ऽप्य् "अराक्षसान्" (म्ध् ३.२३) इत्य् अनेन प्रतिषिद्धः, **त्रयो धर्म्या** इत्य् अनेन विहितः । 

- ब्राह्मणस्य पैशाचो नैवास्ति, क्षत्रियादीनां ब्राह्मदैवार्षा इति स्थितम् ॥ ३.२५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The law laid down in this verse pertains to the *Kṣatriya* and the rest,
not to the Brāhmaṇa; for if it referred to the latter, there would be an
inconsistency regarding the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ forms; as the Brāhmaṇa can never
do the ‘killing and wounding’ (which are inevitable in that form), which
acts are possible only for the *Kṣatriya* and others.

‘*Of the five*’— Forms of marriage, beginning with the
‘*Prājāpatya*’—three are lawful, and two—*i.e*., the *Paiśāca* and the
*Āsura*—should never be adopted.

Though the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ has not been mentioned in connection with the
*Kṣatriya* and others, yet it is here specially enjoined for them; so
also the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*. It is the *Āsura*
and the *Paiśāca* that are interdicted.

The conclusion on this point is as follows:—For the Brāhmaṇa there are
six forms of marriage; of these the ‘*Brāhma*’ is the best of all;
inferior to that are the ‘*Daiva*’ and the ‘*Prājāpatya*;’ inferior to
these is the *Ārṣa*, then the ‘*Gāndharva*,’ then the ‘*Āsura*.’

There are some people who regard this verse as pertaining to the
Brāhmaṇa also. According to these, the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form is permissible
for that Brāhmaṇa who may have adopted the profession of the *Kṣatriya*.
They argue that, even though the Brāhmaṇa may have abandoned his own
functions and taken to those of other castes, if they do some ‘killing
and wounding’ in connection with marriage, he may become liable to the
performance of expiatory rites for doing those acts; but that would not
deprive the ‘Rākṣasa marriage’ of the character of ‘marriage.’

That the ‘*Brāhma*’ is the best form of marriage has been shown by its
results (described in versus 37, *et seq*.). As for the other three,
though they have not been interdicted under any circumstances, yet their
inferiority is deduced from the fact that the results following from
them are of an inferior type. As regards the ‘*Āsura*’ form, since it
has been specifically prescribed for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*, it
implies the exclusion of the *Brāhmaṇa* and the *Kṣatriya* from it. And
yet we have the distinct injunction of six forms as permitted for the
Brāhmaṇa (in 23 above). From all which it follows that there is option;
but it is an option with the restriction that one is to have recourse to
the second option only in the event of the first option being
impossible. Fur-ther, that an option is intended, is clearly established
by the fact that several forms of marriage are permitted, and yet a
combination of all is impossible; just as, in the case of *Vrīhi* and
*Yava*, we admit an option, because both are sanctioned, and yet they
cannot be combined. Thus, then, when other forms are possible, if one
were to adopt the ‘*Āsura*’ form, its results, in regard to spiritual
merit and the character of the offspring, would be inferior.

As regards the *Kṣatriya*, the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form is the best; as it had
been enjoined absolutely without any option by all the four verses.
Verse 23 permits four forms for the *Kṣatriya*, which means that the
‘*Āsura*,’ the ‘*Gāndharva*,’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ also are permitted;
while those latter have been interdicted by the assertion that the
Rākṣasa alone is for the ‘*Kṣatriya*,’ (24). Hence it follows that these
latter forms are *optional*, not primary. In consideration of the
context, it is clear that the injunction is for the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form
only. But, since there is no definite exclusion of the ‘*Prājāpatya*’
form, this latter also is equal to the ‘*Rākṣasa*,’ for the *Kṣatriya*.

Similarly, for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra* also, the ‘*Prājāpatya*,’
which has been mentioned as permitted in all cases, is not prohibited.
The ‘*Āsura*’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ are both ‘permitted’ and ‘prohibited’
for them; the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ also has been interdicted by the phrase,
‘*excepting the Rākṣasa*’ (23), while it is permitted by the assertion
that ‘three are lawful’ (25).

It is for the *Brāhmaṇa* only that the ‘*Paiśāca*’ is not permitted, and
for the *Kṣatriya* and the rest, the ‘*Brāhma*,’ the ‘*Daiva*’ and the
‘*Ārṣa*’ are not permitted at all.—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 860) in support of
the view that certain forms of marriage are permissible for the,
Brāhmaṇa under abnormal circumstances; and adds the following
explanation:—From among the five—Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa
and Paiśāca,—the Āsura having been singled out as fit for the Vaiśya and
the Śūdra only, and the Paiśāca being deprecated for all, the remaining
three alone are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa; *i*. *e*., the Prājāpatya, the
Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa. This conclusion is based on the analogy of
the livelihood recommended for the next lower caste being permissible
for the higher caste in abnormal times; so that the marriages commended
for the Kṣatriya are permitted for the Brāhmaṇa under abnormal
circumstances.

The same work on page 859 quotes the second half of the verse, to the
effect that the Paiśāca is not lawful for any caste.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 159) quotes it, and offers the following
explanation:—From among the five—Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa
and Paiśāca,—three are ‘lawful *viz*, Prājāpatya, Gāndharva and Rākṣasa.
The second half indicates two of these—*i.e*., the Āsura and Paiśāca—as
unlawful.—Even though the Prājāpatya has been enumerated in verse 24
among the primary forms recommended for the Brāhmaṇa, yet, the same is
here mentioned only as ‘lawful under abnormal circumstances,’ with a
view to indicate that it is inferior to the Ārṣa.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra p. 487) quotes this verse and adds the
following explanation—From among the forms beginning with the Brāhma and
ending with the Āsura, three—*i*. *e*., the Brāhma, the Daiva and the
Prājāpatya are lawful; while Ārṣa and the Āsura are unlawful, on account
of their involving the *purchase* of a wife; as between these two also,
one should never adopt the Āsura, which should be avoided as carefully
as the Paiśāca, It goes on to add that here Manu has set forth only a
view that has been held by ‘some one’; according to his own view, there
is no ‘purchase’ involved in the Ārṣa marriage, where the ‘pair of cows’
given are not by way of a ‘price’ for the girl; as has been clearly
declared in verse 53 below. So that, according to Manu, the Ārṣa is as
lawful as the other three.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 683);—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
479), which adds the following explanation:—Among the five, beginning
with the *Brāhma* and ending with the *Āsura*, the first three are
‘righteous,’ as not involving any form of selling;—the *Ārṣa* and the
*Āsura* are ‘unrighteous,’ as involving *bartering*, and lienee, like
the Paiśāca, they should not be adopted even in abnormal circumstances.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (Ādi-parva, 73.11).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 859).—‘The last one has been
condemned.’

*Kaśyapa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 488).—‘The woman got by purchase is not
called *Patnī*; she is not fit to participate in rites either to gods or
to Pitṛs; Kaśyapa has called her a *slave*.’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 488).—‘The first four marriages are
conducive to spiritual merit and help also in the water-offerings; that
is, those in which no price is paid, and which alone are fit for the
Brāhmaṇa; these save both families.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

025	But in these (Institutes of the sacred law) three of the five (last) are declared to be lawful and two unlawful; the Paisaka and the Asura (rites) must never be used.
</details>
