+++
title = "026 पृथक् पृथग्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The two forms of marriage mentioned before—i.e., the Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa—have been declared, whether separately or mixed, to be lawful for the Kṣatriya.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पृथक् पृथग्** इत्य् अनुवादः, पूर्वेणैव सिद्धत्वात् । **मिश्राव्** इति विधीयते, निरपेक्षाणाम्[^८१] इतरेषां गान्धर्वराक्षसयोर् विहितत्वात् । व्रीहियववद् अप्राप्ते मिश्रणवचनम् इदम् । व्रीहिभिर् यजेत यवैर् वेत्य् एकयागप्रयोगविषयत्वेनेतरेतरानपेक्षद्रव्यविधानाद् विकल्पो, न मिश्रीभावः । मिश्रीभावे हि न व्रीहिशास्त्रार्थो ऽनुष्ठितः स्यान् न च यवशास्त्रार्थः । एवम् इहैकस्यां कन्यायां स्वीकर्तव्यायां युगपद् उपायद्वयम् अप्राप्तं विधीयते । 


[^८१]:
     M G 1st ed.: nirapekṣāyāṃ

- तस्य विषयः- यदा पितृगेहे कन्या तत्रस्थेन[^८२] कुमारेण कथंचिद् वृष्टिगोचरापन्नेन दूतिसंस्तुतेन तद्रतापि[^८३] तथैव, परवती न च संयोगं लभते, तदा वरेण संविदं कृत्वा "नय माम् इतो येन केनचिद् उपायेन" इत्य् आत्मानं नाययति, स च शक्त्यतिशयाद् धत्वा छित्त्वा चेत्य् एवं हरति, तदा "इच्छयान्योन्यसंयोगः" (म्ध् ३.३२) इत्य् एतद् अप्य् अस्ति गान्धर्वे रूपम्, "हत्वा छित्त्वा" (म्ध् ३.३३) इति च राक्षसरूपम् । 


[^८३]:
     M G 1st ed.: itarāpi


[^८२]:
     M G: tatrasthe

- ताव् एतौ विवाहौ क्षत्रियसैव भवतः । **धर्म्यौ** **क्षत्रियस्य तौ** **पूर्वचोदिताव्** इत्य् अनुवादः । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुः- यः क्षत्रियो बहुविवाहान् कुरुते स कांचिद् गान्धर्वेन विवाहे परिणयते कांचिद् राक्षसेणेत्य् एष मिश्रपक्षः । अथ वा सर्वा एवान्यतरेणेति **पृथक् पृथक्** । अनेन चैतज् ज्ञायते । क्षत्रियस्यानयोर् एवानियमेन प्रवृत्तिः, प्राजापत्यादीनां तु य एव प्रथमं कृतस् तेनैवान्यापि विवाह्या ॥ ३.२६ ॥

_इदानीं स्वरूपम् एतेषाम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Singly*’—this is a inert re-iteration, each single form having been
already prescribed in the foregoing verses. The ‘mixed’ form is what is
prescribed here; where the ‘*Gāndharva-Rākṣasa*’ are prescribed
independently of (apart from) the other forms. The notion derived from
what has gone before being that each form stands apart by itself, just
like the *Vrīhi* being used apart from the *Yava*,—the present verse
lays down the combination (of two). When we have two such texts as
‘offer the *Vrīhi*’ and ‘offer the *Yava?* each of which prescribes a
substance to be used at a sacrifice independently of the other,—we
conclude that the two are meant to be optional alternatives, and they
are not meant to be mixed tip; because, if the mixture of both were
used, we would be obeying neither the injunction of *Yava*, nor that of
*Vrīhi*. Similarly, in the present case, when only one girl is to be
married, it being impossible to adopt any two forms of marriage, the
present text proceeds to prescribe the combination of two of them.

Such a combination of the said two forms would be possible under the
following circumstances:—A girl living in her father’s house, happens to
see a boy living in the same house and having heard praises from
messengers, falls in love with him, but not being mistress of herself
she cannot meet him,—and then she enters into a compact with her lover,
requests him to take her away by some means or other, and gets herself
carried away: and the bridegroom, being possessed of great strength,
carries her away after having ‘killed and wounded’ (her guardians): Now
in this case, since there is ‘voluntary union between the two’ (verse
32), it fulfils the conditions of the ‘*Gāndharva*’ form: while, since
he has carried her away, after ‘having killed and wounded’ (verse 33),
the conditions of the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form also become fulfilled.

These two forms are possible for the *Kṣatriya* only. *These two are
lawful for the Kṣatriya*—says the Text.

*Mentioned before*—is a mere reiterative reference.

Others have offered the following explanation:—When a *Kṣatriya* marries
several girls, he marries one by the ‘*Gāndharva*’ form, and another by
the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form:—and this is the ‘*mixed form*’ meant by the text.
And when all are married by one or the other of these two forms, it is a
case of ‘*separately*’ mentioned by the text. And from this we gather
that it is only these two forms of marriage that the *Kṣatriya* might
adopt promiscuously—sometimes the one and sometimes the other; while in
the case of the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ and the rest, he should adopt the same
form in all his marriages which he happens to adopt in the first.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 860), where the
following notes are added:—This lays down the forms.permissible for the
Kṣatriya under abnormal circumstances.—‘*Pṛthak*’ means *unmixed*, and
‘*Miśra*,’ *mixed*; we have the latter form in a case where the marriage
having been previously settled by mutual understanding between the bride
and the bridegroom, if the bride’s people oppose it, the bridegroom
takes her away by force, as happened in the case of Kṛṣṇa’s marriage
with Rukmiṇī (described in the *Bhāgavata*). A further distinction has
got to be made here: the ‘mixed’ form is permissible only under abnormal
conditions, while the ‘unmixed’ one is a secondary form permissible for
all time; and hence the mention of this latter in the present verse is
merely reiterative (as remarked by Medhātithi also),—the reiteration
being made for the purpose of indicating the utter inferiority of the
‘mixed’ to the ‘unmixed’ form. This implies that for other castes also,
in the event of an ‘unmixed’ form being not possible, the ‘mixed’ form
becomes permissible.—Even though the Paiśāca has been prohibited for
all, yet it has been mentioned among the forms of marriage only for the
purpose of its being permitted for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra under
exceptionally abnormal circumstances.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 160) also quotes this verse as laying down what is
permissible for the Kṣatriya under abnormal conditions. īt adds the
following notes:—‘*Pṛthak pṛthak*’ means the primary and the secondary
forms, laid down as alternatives; and the second half quotes an example
of the ‘mixed’ form; there is a ‘mixture’ of the Gāndharva and Rākṣasa
forms when after a mutual understanding has been arrived at between the
bride and the bridegroom, if the bride’s people raise objections to the
marriage, the bridegroom fights with them and takes away the bride by
force.—This is to be understood only as an illustration; on the same
analogy, other ‘mixtures’ may be permissible for other castes also.—Even
though very much deprecated, the Paiśāca form is permitted under
abnormal circumstances for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra,—as also for such
twice-born persons as have adopted the living of the Vaiśya or the
Śūdra.

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 682).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (Ādi-parva, 73. 12-13).—‘The Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa are
lawful for the Kṣatriya: the two may be performed either separately or
jointly.’

*Baudhāyana* (1. 11. 16).—‘Some people commend the Gāndharva for
all,—since it is accompanied by love.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	For Kshatriyas those before-mentioned two rites, the Gandharva and the Rakshasa, whether separate or mixed, are permitted by the sacred tradition.
</details>
