+++
title = "027 आच्छाद्य चाऽर्चयित्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When one himself invites a man endowed with learning and character and gives to him his daughter, after having dressed and worshipped (them),—this is called the “Brāhma” form.—(27)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आच्छाद्येति** । आच्छादनविशेषो ऽभिप्रेतः, अन्यस्यौचित्येनैव प्राप्तत्वात् । उत्कृष्टेनाच्छादनेन यथादेशं यथासंभवं यथायोग्येन वाससा परिधाप्य । **अर्हयित्वा** । अनेनालंकरणकटककणिकादिना प्रीतिविशेषसत्कारविशेषैर् अर्चनं कृत्वा । एतेनाच्छादनार्हणेन कन्याया वरस्य चान्यतरसंबन्धे प्रमाणाभावाद् उभयोपयोगः कार्यः । **श्रुतशीलवते** । अन्ये ऽपि स्मृत्यन्तरोक्ता वरगुणा द्रष्टव्याः "युवा धीमाञ् जनप्रियः । यत्नात् परीक्षितः पुंस्त्वे" इति (य्ध् १.५५) । **स्वयं** प्रागयाचितः । स्वपुरुषप्रेषणैर् **आहूय** अन्तिकदेशम् आनाय्य वरम् । यद् **दानं** स **ब्राह्मो धर्मो** विवाहः । अविशेषवचनो ऽपि **धर्म**शब्दः पूर्वापेक्षितत्वात्[^८४] तत्पर एव द्रष्टव्यः । अयाचितलाभो ऽभ्यर्हणापूर्वको ब्राह्मो विवाह इति लक्षणार्थः ।


[^८४]:
     M G add: asya

- <u>ननु</u> चेदम् अयुक्तं स्त्रीस्वीकारार्थो विवाह इति । 

- <u>यावद्</u> विवाहपर्यन्तं चैतद् दानम् । नाकृते विवाहे दानार्थनिवृत्तिः । स हि तस्याः प्रतिग्रहकालः । न चासति परिग्रहे दानं परिसमाप्यते । न स्वत्वनिवृत्तिमात्रं दानम् । परस्वत्वापत्तिपर्यन्तं हि तत् । तथा च वक्ष्यति "तेषां तु निष्ठा विज्ञेया विद्वद्भिः सप्तमे पदे" इति (म्ध् ८.२२७) । एवं विवाहकाल एव कन्या दातव्या । तथा च गृह्यकारस् तस्मिन्न् एव काले ब्राह्मविवाहे काण्डिकधर्मं दर्शयति ।यत् तु प्राग् विवाहाद् दानं तदुपसंवादनवचनमात्रम्[^८५] । न हि तस्मिन्न् अक्रियमाणे ऽभिप्रेतकाले ऽवश्यं विवाहनिर्वृत्तिः । कश्चित् प्राग्निरूपिते न दद्याद् अपि, इतरो वा कदाचिन् न प्रतिगृह्णीयात् । तस्मात् प्राग्विवाहाद् उपसंवादः कर्तव्यः- तदा त्वयेयं देया मया चेयं वोढव्येति । यथैवान्तःक्रतुः सोपक्रियो[^८६] ऽचोदिततत्सिद्धार्थो ऽर्थाद् बहिष्क्रियते ।


[^८६]:
     M G 1st ed.: so 'pakriyo; G 2nd ed.: sapariṣkaryaḥ


[^८५]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vācanamātram

- <u>ये तु मन्यन्ते</u> यथैव गवादेर् द्रव्यस्यादृष्टार्थतया दीयमानस्य मन्त्रपूर्वकेण प्रतिग्रहेण दानम् अपि निर्वर्तते, तेनैवेदम् उक्तं ददातिषु चैवं धर्मेष्व् इति । एवं चेह प्रतिग्रहमन्त्रस्थानीयो विवाह इति । तथा च उपयमनं विवाह इत्य् एको ऽर्थः । उपयमनं च स्वकरणम् । एवं ह स्म भगवान् पाणिनिः स्मरति "उपाद् यमः स्वकरणे" इति (पाण् १.३.५६) । अतो विवाहः कन्यास्वीकारार्थः ।

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । स्वीकृताया विवाहो भार्याकरणार्थः । नानेन कर्मणा प्रतिगृह्णीयाद् इति विधिर् अस्ति । न च वैवाहिका मन्त्रा प्रतिग्रहप्रकारकाः, यथा "देवस्य त्वा प्रगृह्णामि" इति मन्त्राः । यत् तु स्वकरण इति तन् न विरुद्धम् । विवाहस्याप्य् अस्ति स्वकरणरूपता । दानेन स्वत्वमात्रे प्रतिपन्ने विवाहेन विशिष्टं स्वत्वं क्रियते । नेयं गवादिद्रव्यवत् स्वं यथेष्टविनियोज्यतया, अपि तु जायात्वेन । विशिष्ट एव हि स्वस्वामिभावो जायापतिलक्षणसंबन्धः । तथा च दर्शयिष्यति- "मङ्गलार्थं स्वस्त्ययनं । । । विवाहेषु प्रदानं स्वाम्यकारणम्" इति (म्ध् ५.१५२) ॥ ३.२७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author now describes the exact nature of the several forms of
marriage.

‘*After having dressed*.’—What is meant is a particular form of
dressing, ordinary dressing being absolutely necessary (and hence
implying no special regard). Hence the. meaning is—‘After having dressed
with nice and suitable clothes, such as might be available at the
place.’

‘*Having worshipped*;’—*i.e*., having done worship with bracelets,
armlets and other ornaments, and also special modes of honouring,
indicative of great affection.

There is nothing to indicate the connection of the ‘dressing’ and
‘worshipping’ with either the bride only or with the bridegroom only:
hence they should be taken as relating to both.

‘*Endowed with learning and character*.’—This implies also the other
qualifications of the bridegroom, mentioned in other law-books; such as
‘intelligent, loved by the people, having his virility carefully tested’
(Yājñavalkya, *Ācītra*, 55).

‘*Himself*;’—*i.e*., not previously requested by him.

‘*Invites*’ him;—*i.e*., gets the bridegroom to come, by sending bis own
man.

This giving away of the daughter is the ‘*Brahma form*’ of marriage.
Though the term ‘form’ is a general one, yet, in consideration of the
context, it has to be taken as standing for *marriage*.

The upshot of this definition comes to be that ‘when a man obtains a
wife without asking for it, and with due honour, it is the *Brahma* form
of *marriage*.’

“The definition provided in the text cannot be right; as, in reality,
‘marriage’ is for the purpose of accepting a wife \[so that the mere
‘giving’ by the father cannot be *marriage*.\]”

The ‘giving’ spoken of in the text is meant to extend right up to the
end of the marriage-ceremony; in fact, until the marriage has been
performed, the ‘giving’ is not complete; it is at the time of ‘marriage’
that there is ‘acceptance’ of the girl by the bridegroom; and until this
*acceptance*, the ‘gift’ is not complete. Specially, ‘giving’ here does
not consist merely in the renouncing of one’s proprietary right; it
extends up to the creating of the proprietary right of another person
(the recipient). It is in view of this that the author is going to
declare later on—‘the learned should regard the seventh step as the
final stage of the marriage’ (5.152). Thus, then, it is at the time of
marriage that the maiden should be given away; it is for this reason
that the author of the *Gṛhyasūtra* has laid down the rites in
connection with the *Brāhma* marriage as to be performed at the time of
the marriage itself.

As for the ‘giving’ before the marriage, this is merely a verbal
compact; and if no such compact has been entered into, it is just
possible that at the desired time the marriage may not be actually
performed; for in the absence of formal agreement, the father of the
bride may not give her, or the bridegroom may not accept her. Hence it
is necessary that before the actual marriage, a regular contract should
be entered into, in some such form, ‘she is to be given by you and
accepted by me.’ \[Just as an internal sacrifice becomes naturally
excluded when it is deficient in some essential factor and does not
fulfil the conditions of the injunction.?\]

Some people argue as follows:—“When the cow and such other things are
given away for the purpose of obtaining a transcendental result, the
*giving* is accomplished merely by the recepient accepting it with the
proper texts and the same should be the case with all acts of *giving*.
So that, in the case in question also, marrying occupying the same
position as *accepting*, ‘marriage’ should be regarded as synonymous
with *acceptance*; and the act of *accepting* consists in *making the
thing one*’a *own*; as says the revered Pāṇini in Sūtra 1. 3. 56—‘The
root *yama* with the prefix *upa* in the sense of *making one’s own*
takes the Ātmanepada.’ From this it is clear that marriage is done only
for the purpose of *receiving the maiden*.”

This, however, is not right. In fact, the ‘marriage’ is of the maiden
that has been *accepted*, and it is for the purpose of making her a
*wife*. The Injunction bearing upon marriage is not in the form
that—‘one should *accept* the maiden by means of this rite;’ nor are the
sacred texts recited at marriage such as signify the act of *accepting*;
as is the case with such *mantras* as—‘*devasya tvā pratigṛhṇāmi, etc*.’

As for what has been said regarding the sense of *making one’s own*,
such a sense is not incompatible with our view. The act of ‘marrying’
also is of the nature of *making one’s own*. The act of ‘giving’ only
brings about the ownership of the recipient; and the act of ‘marrying’
creates a particular form of ownership. Further, the wife is not a
‘property’ in the same sense that the cow and other things are; the
latter are property’ in the sense that they may be used in any way one
likes, while the maiden married by one can be used only as ‘wife so that
the relation between husband and wife is of that of a peculiar kind of
ownership; as will be shown later on, under 5. 152.—(27).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Arcayitvā*’—Medhātithi and Kullūka take this as well as ‘*ācchādya*’
as referring to both the bride and the bridegroom;—Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghvānanda refer ‘*urcayitvā*’ to the bridegroom only.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 847), where the
following explanatory notes are added:—‘*Ācchādya*,’ ‘having dressed,’
with clothes;—‘*arcayitvā*’ ‘having worshipped’ with garlands,
sandal-paint and so forth;—both these are to be done to the bridegroom,
not to the bride; since both these are related to ‘*āhūya*’ ‘having
invited,’ which cannot refer to the bride;—‘*Svayam*,’ ‘himself,’ should
not be taken (as Medhātithi and Kullūka take it) as precluding the
possiblity of the request for the girl coming from the bridegroom; as
such preclusion would be inconsistent with the rule laying down the
‘selection’ of the bride by the bridegroom.—Further Baudhāyana
says—“After ascertaining his *Śrutaśīle*, learning and character, one
gives the girl to the Student *who seeks for her*,”—and here we find it
distinctly laid down that there should be *a seeking for the girl* by
the bridegroom;—in this passage ‘Student,’ *Brahmacāri*, stands for one
whose observance of studentship has not suffered in any way.—‘The
seeing’ spoken of by Baudhāyana consists in selecting the bride. That
the father should ‘himself’ invite the bridegroom has been laid down as
the peculiar characteristic of the ‘Brāhma’ form of marriage. Such also
is the custom among the people of the south.

This verse is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 106) in connection
with a somewhat subtle discussion. The author holds the view that
‘marriage,’ ‘*vivāha*,’ is the *act of taking a wife*, and hence the
‘giving’ of the bride cannot be called ‘marriage,’ as the *giving* is
done by the Father, while the *taking of a wife* is done by the
Bridegroom. On this ground, he argues, the definition of the Brāhma form
of *marriage* provided in the present text of Manu should not be
explained as consisting in the ‘*giving* of the girl’; the word
‘*Dānam*’ has, therefore, to be explained differently, in its
etymological sense ‘*yasmai dīyate tat dānam*’ *i.e*., ‘*dānam*’ means
‘that for the sake of accomplishing which the *giving* is done’;—and as
it is the Student’s ‘taking of a wife’ that is accomplished by *giving*,
it is this ‘taking of the wife’ which should be taken as expressed by
the word ‘*dānam*.’ He argues further that if the ‘marriage consisted in
the *giving* of the girl, then the agent, *person* marrying, would be
the bride’s Father, and not the Bridegroom. The author is conscious of
the syntactical difficulty involved in his explanation, in connection
with the participle ‘*āhūya*’, ‘having invited,’ which, as it stands,
must have the same nominative agent as the ‘giving.’ But he brushes it
off with the remark that the derivation of the verbal root in ‘*āhūya*’
being only a secondary factor, may be ignored, or we may supply some
such word as ‘*sthitaḥ*’;—the meaning thus being—‘the man who takes the
wife when he comes *after being invited*.’

It is interesting to note that the question raised by Raghunandana in
*Smṛtitattva* has been anticipated and satisfactorily explained by
Medhātithi (see *Translation*, p. 58).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 88);—in *Dānakriyākaumudī* (p. 9)
as laying down the necessity of *clothing* the girl properly;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 61a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 227), which explains ‘*arcayitvā*’ as ‘having worshipped him with
offerings of ornaments and other tilings.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (4. 6).—‘One should give away his daughter, dressed and
adorned, to a man who is endowed with learning, character, good conduct,
and relations;—this is the Brāhma form.’

*Baudhāyana* (1. 11. 2).—‘The Brāhma form consists in giving the girl to
a man who has kept the vows of the Religious Student seeking for wife,
after having tested his learning and character.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2. 11. 17).—‘In the Brāhma form of marriage,
one should find out all about the relations, the character, the learning
and the health of the man and then give to him the girl after having
adorned her to the best of his power, for the purpose of hearing
children and for companionship.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.30).—‘That is the form of marriage in which the father
gives away the girl to a person desirous of having a wife, after having
made to him an offering of water.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.19).—‘The Brāhma form consists in inviting the qualified man
and giving the girl to him.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 58).—‘When the girl, adorned to the best of one’s
power, is given to a man who has been invited for the purpose, it
constitutes the Brāhma form of marriage; the son born of these marriages
purities twenty-one generations on both sides.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 6. 15).—‘Having adorned the girl one should
give her away, preceded by the water-offering; the son born thereof
purifies twelve future generations and twelve past generations on both
sides.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away the
girl, endowed with auspicious qualities, dressed and adorned, wearing
now bangles, to a deserving man; this constitutes the Brāhma form of
marriage.’

*Saṃvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away—by
the Brāhma form of marriage—his daughter, endowed with good qualities,
after having adorned her with excellent ornaments, to a suitable
bridegroom.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away the
girl, dressed and adorned, after going round the fire thrice and
pronounced the name and *gotra*; this is the Brāhma form.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘The girl that is given away
with water, they regard as *Brahmadeyā*.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘When one offers a pair of
clothes to a man and gives his girl to him, without deprecating or
discussing him, directing him to jointly carry on Dharma, this is the
Brāhma form of marriage.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘When one gives to a
man of his own caste, who is well known to him, the girl who has not
reached puberty,—this is the Brāhma marriage.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘One should give away the
girl adorned with gold, before she has reached puberty.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘To a qualified
bridegroom, you give the girl, with proper faith and confidence, after
having adorned her to the best of your power and endowed her with
wealth.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

027	The gift of a daughter, after decking her (with costly garments) and honouring (her by presents of jewels), to a man learned in the Veda and of good conduct, whom (the father) himself invites, is called the Brahma rite.
</details>
