+++
title = "034 सुप्ताम् मत्ताम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the man approaches the girl by stealth, while she is asleep, or intoxicated or unconscious,—it is the “Paiśāca” form, the wickedest and the basest of marriages.—(34).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

राक्षसपैशाचयोर् अनिच्छा तुल्या । राक्षसे हननम्, पैशाचे वञ्चनम् । **सुप्तां** निद्रयाभिभूताम् । **मत्तां** क्षीबां मद्यपरवशाम् । **प्रमत्तां** वातसंक्षोभेण नष्टचेतनाम् । **रहो** ऽप्रकासम् **उपगच्छति** मैथुनधर्मे प्रवर्तते **स पैशाचो** विवाहः सर्व**विहाहानां** **पापिष्ठः** पापहेतुः । धर्मापत्यं न ततः संपद्यते ।

- इह गान्धर्वराक्षसपैशाचानां प्रकृतविवाहसामानाधिकरण्यात् संयोगहरणोपगमा एव पाणिग्रहणसंस्कारनिरपेक्षा विवाहा इति मन्यन्ते । 

- तेषां ब्राह्मादिष्व् अपि दानविवाहयोः सामानाधिकरण्यात् संस्कारो विनिवर्तते । यथा च न निवर्तते तथा दर्शितम् । लक्षणया विवाहप्रयोजनदाने विवाहशब्दः । 

- गान्धर्वे तु भगवता कृष्णद्वैपायनेन दुष्यन्तशकुन्तलासंगमने वर्णितम्- "अनग्निकम् अमन्त्रकम्" इति, तद्दर्शनेन पाणिग्रहणसंस्कारो ऽस्ति, मन्त्रादि वर्जितस् तु[^८९] ।


[^८९]:
     M G: varjitas tu paiśāce for mantrādi varjitas tu

- पैशाचे[^९०] पुनर् विवदन्ते- मुख्यं चोपगमनं । न[^९१] च कन्यात्वम् अपैति, संस्कारैस् तद्विनिवर्तनात् । अतश् च "पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्राः कन्यास्व् एव प्रतिष्ठिताः" (म्ध् ८.२२६) इति प्रतिषेधस्याप्रवृत्तेर् अस्त्य् एव मन्त्रवत् संस्कारसंबन्धः । स च प्रतिषेधः कृतः संस्कारप्रतिषेधार्थः । सा हि मन्त्रैः संकृतत्वाद् व्यपगतकन्याभावा । अत एव भवतु प्रथमम् उपगमस् ततो ऽकन्यादोषो नास्ति । तथा च कानीनः कर्ण इति दर्शनम् । यदि तु पुरुषप्रयोगेण कन्यात्वम् अपेयात् कथम् इयं वाचोयुक्तिः "कन्यायाः पुत्रः कानीनः" इति । अथ त्व् असंस्कृता कन्योच्यते ततो युक्तम् "कर्णादयो ह्य् अनूढायाः पुत्राः" इति । मुख्ये ऽभ्युपगमने कन्याया अपत्योत्पत्तेः संभवः । वर्ण्यते चेतिहासादिषु तथाभूताया विवाहः ।अथ मद्यमदादिना निर्वृत्ते रतिसंबन्धे किमर्थः संस्कार इति ।


[^९१]:
     M G omit: na


[^९०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: paiśāce

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । यद्य् अपि स्त्रीपुंसधर्मो निवृत्तो ऽतिक्रान्तश् च कन्यागमनप्रतिषेधस् तथापि तया सहाधिकारार्थं पुनश् च गमने कन्यागमनं मा भुद् इति तदर्थं संस्कारकरणम् । कन्यागमनप्रतिषेधातिकर्मसंबन्धेन पुरुषार्थतयापि निन्द्यते विवाहो ऽयम् । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । यतो ऽयं लोके कन्याशब्दः पुंसासंप्रयुक्तां स्त्रियम् आचष्टे, न संस्कारभावसापेक्षाम् । अकृतसंस्कारा अपि पुरुषैः क्षतयोनयो न कन्या इति व्यवह्रियन्ते । तासां च वेशश्रितानां गमने न कन्यागमनदोषः । यद्य् अपि कुमारीकन्याशब्दौ प्रथमवयोवचनाव् इष्येते, तथापि विवाहविधाव् अनुपभुक्तपुर्वाम् एव स्त्रियम् आचक्षते । तथा च कुमारवेशधारिणीं नातिप्रकाशप्रवृत्तपुंसंप्रयोगां भार्यात्वेनार्थयमानो ऽन्यैर् अवबोध्यते "नैषा कुमारी नष्टो ऽस्याः कौमारो भावः" । 

- संस्कारपरिलोपश् च स्यात् । गर्भाधानं हि मन्त्रवत् कर्तव्यम् "विष्णुर् योनिं कल्पयतु" (र्व् १०.१८४.१) इति कॢप्तायाश् च कल्पनम् अशक्यम् । तत्रायथार्थो मन्त्रप्रयोगः स्यात् । न चानूढायाः पैशाचधर्मे मन्त्रप्रयोगः, ऊढायास् तच्छ्रवणात् । न च[^९२] पैशाचवर्जम् अन्येषु विवाहेषु तत्कल्पयितुं उक्तं युक्तम् अविशेषश्रवणात् । 


[^९२]:
     M G omit: na ca

- तस्मान् मुख्योपगमपक्ष एवमादयो बहवो दोषाः प्राप्नुवन्ति । अत आलिङ्गनोपगूहनपरिचुम्बनादिषूपगमनार्थेषु व्यापारेषु साहचर्यात् तादर्थ्याच् चोपपूर्वो गमिर् द्रष्टव्यः । यत् तु "कानीनः पुत्रः" इति तत्र मुख्यार्थासंभवाल् लक्षणया संस्काराभावप्रतिपत्तिः[^९३] । यत् तु संस्कारदर्शनं तत् तु क्वचिद् एव । यद्य् अपि "या गर्भिणी संस्क्रियते ज्ञाताज्ञतापि वा सती" (म्ध् ९.१७३) इति तत्र य एवोपगन्ता स एव न[^९४] संस्कर्ता । न त्व् असौ पैशाचो विवाहः । पैशाचे हि येनैव समुपभुक्ता तस्मा[^९५] एव दीयते, स एवैनां संस्करोतीति । गर्भिण्यास् तु संस्कारो वाचनिकः । एतच् च सर्वं निपुणतरं पुनर् नवमे वक्ष्यते ।


[^९५]:
     M G 1st ed.: yasmā


[^९४]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na


[^९३]:
     M G: saṃskārabhāva-

- <u>अपरे</u> मन्यन्ते- "सत्यं मुख्यम् उपगमनम् अमुख्यत्वे तु गमनप्रतिषेधानुपपत्तिः" इति । 

- <u>यदि हि</u> मुख्यम् उपगमस् तदा स एव विवाहो ऽन्यस्यानन्तरोक्तेन न्यायेनाभावात् । ततश् च नास्ति तस्य प्रतिषेधस्य विषयः, यतः इच्छया गान्धर्वो हठाद् राक्षसो ऽन्यथा पैशाचः । न चान्यः प्रकारो ऽस्ति येन स विषयः प्रतिषेधः[^९६] स्यात् । अस्ति त्व् अस्य विषयः- यत्र हठाद् रहसि गमनम्, या वा पितृभ्यां दीयते न चोपसंस्क्रियते । न[^९७] चासौ[^९८] गान्धर्वः, कन्येच्छाया अभावात् । अत एव भर्तुर् अपि न कन्यागामित्वम्, विषयान्तरस्य संभवात् । 


[^९८]:
     M G 1st ed. add: teṣām api


[^९७]:
     M G: nā


[^९६]:
     M G: sarvaviṣayapratiṣedhaḥ

- तस्मात् क्षतयोन्याः संस्कारनिषेधाद् ब्राह्मादिवद् उपायत्वात् तद्वच् च विवाहशब्दोपपत्तेः प्रकरणसामर्थ्याड् गौण एवोपगमार्थः ।

- एषाम् च भेदः- अप्रार्थितोपनतो भूमिहिरण्यादिवद् ब्राह्मः । ऋत्विक्त्वेन विशेषेण दैवः । गोमिथुनेनार्षः । याच्ञयायच्ञया वा "सहोभौ चरतां धर्मम्" इति वचनव्यवस्थया प्राजापत्यः । शेषाः सुबोधभेदाः । 

- ब्राह्मादीनाम् इदम् अर्थे तद्धितः । ब्रह्मादिसंबन्धिता च स्तुत्यारोप्यते । एवं सर्वेषु । पैशाचः पिषाचानाम् अयं युक्त इति निन्दा ॥ ३.३४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The unwillingness of the girl is the condition common to the ‘*Rākṣasa*’
and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ forms: the difference is that in the former there is
*beating*, while in the latter there is *stealth*.

‘*Asleep*’—overpowered by sleep.

‘*Intoxicated*’—senseless, under the influence of wine, &c.

‘*Unconscious*’—who has lost consciousness on account of the disorders
of the wind-humour.

‘*By stealth*’—not openly.

‘*Approaches*’— has sexual intercourse with.

This is the Paiśāca marriage, of all marriages the ‘*wickedest*’—the
most sinful. That is to say, the issue of such a marriage does not
become the *rightful* child.

------------------------

In connection with this subject, some people think that the
‘*Gāndharva*’ form of marriage is accomplished by mere ‘intercourse,’
the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ by mere ‘abduction’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ by mere
‘approach,’—irrespective of the sacramental rites relating to the
‘taking of the hand’ and the rest. And they base this idea upon the fact
that all these three are mentioned in apposition to ‘marriage’ which
forms the subject-matter of the context.

But, according to these people, in the ‘*Brāhma*’ and other forms also,
since the ‘giving’ is mentioned in apposition to ‘marriage,’ the
sacramental rites would cease (to be necessary factors in the marriage).
But we have shown above, how. these rites cannot be omitted. The fact of
the matter is that it is only figuratively that the term ‘marriage’ has
been applied to that act of ‘*giving*’ which is done for the purpose of
‘marriage.’

As regards the ‘*Gandharva*’ form, the revered Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana has
described it, in connection with the union of Duṣyanta and Śukuntalā, as
being ‘without fire and without sacred texts;’ and this shows that there
are certain sacramental rites of ‘taking the hand,’ etc., but they are
done without sacred texts etc.

As regards the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form, there is a difference of opinion:—In
this form (it is argued) ‘approaching’ is the prime factor; but that
does not deprive the girl of her ‘maidenhood;’ as this can be put an end
to only by the sacramental rites attendant upon marriage; so that the
girl still continuing to be a ‘maiden,’ the prohibition of rites in
connection with ‘non-maidens’—which we find in the statement that ‘the
sacred texts relating to marriage are restricted to *maidens only*’ (8.
226)—does not apply to this form of marriage; and hence its connection
with the sacramental rites remains undisturbed. The prohibition just
referred to is for the purpose of precluding the sacramental rites (from
the case of non-maidens); while the girl married by the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form
has her maidenhood destroyed only when she has gone through the rites.
Thus, then, even though the ‘approaching’ may take place first, yet the
taint of ‘non-maiden-hood’ does not apply to her. It is only in
accordance with this view that Karṇa can be called ‘maiden-born;’ for if
mere intercourse with man were to deprive the girl of her maidenhood,
how could we have such a statement as ‘the son born of a maiden is
called *maiden-born*.’ If, on the other hand, the name ‘maiden’ be
applied only to such girls as have not had the sacramental rites
performed for them, then the said statement would be all right, Karṇa
and others of his kind, being sons of *unmarried* girls. It is only if
‘approaching’ be the prime factor that it is possible for a child being
born from a ‘maiden.’ In fact, we find in stories the description of the
‘marriage’ of girls who had been previously ‘approached’ by the
‘Paiśāca’ form.

It might be asked—“when sexual intercourse has been already accomplished
with the help of intoxicants, etc., what would be the use of the
sacramental rites?”

The answer to this is as follows:—Though the act of copulation has been
accomplished, and the man. has transgressed the prohibition of
intercourse with a ‘maiden,’ yet the performance of the rites is
necessary,—firstly, for the purpose of making her entitled to share in
the religious acts of her husband, and, secondly, for the purpose of
avoiding the sin of repeating the act of having intercourse with a
‘maiden.’ This form of marriage is thus deprecated by reason of its
involving a transgression of the prohibition of having intercourse with
a maiden, and also because it subserves the purely physical purposes of
the man (and not any religious purpose).

The above view, however, is not right; because, in ordinary parlance,
the term ‘maiden’ denotes the girl who has had no intercourse with man,
and not one for whom the sacramental rites have not been performed. In
fact, even though her sacramental rites have not been perforated; if a
girl happens to have sexual intercourse with man,-she ceases to be
regarded as a ‘maiden;’ and when such girls have taken to the profession
of prostitutes, intercourse with them does not involve the sin of having
intercourse with a ‘maiden.’ It is true that the words ‘virgin’ and
‘maiden’ have beeu regarded as referring to a female in the earlier
years of her age; but, in connection with rules relating to marriage,
they are always used in the sense of one who has had ho intercourse with
man. It is for this reason that when a man is found to be seeking
marriage with a girl who maintains the appearance of a virgin, and does
not openly go in for sexual intercourse,—he is warned by people with
such words as—‘she is no longer a virgin, her virginhood has been
destroyed.’

Further, in the case of marrying such a girl, there would be a serious
deficiency in the sacramental rites themselves. *E.g*., the rite of
‘conception’ has to be done with sacred texts, such as
‘*Viṣṇuryoniṅkalpayatu, etc*. (Ṛgveda, 10.184. 1),—which means ‘May
Viṣṇu generate upon your generative organ;’ and there can be no
‘generation’ (by Viṣṇu) of what has already been generated’ (by another
man); so that the use of the sacred text in this case would be
meaningless. Nor could, any such text be used when an unmarried girl
would be ‘approached’ in the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form; as it has been definitely
declared that it is to be used only in the case of ‘married’ girls. Nor
would it be right to hold that the ‘generation’ (spoken of in the said
text) refers to the case of marriages other than the ‘*Paiśāca*;’ for
the use of the text has been prescribed without any restriction at all.

The above and several other difficulties crop up if ‘approaching’ is
regarded as the principal factor. The term ‘*Upagamana*,’ ‘approach,’
then, should be taken as standing for the acts of embracing, kissing and
such other concomitants of actual ‘intercourse;’—such use of the term
being due to the fact that the said acts are concomitants of, and lead
up to, the act of ‘intercourse.’ As regards the expression, ‘the
maiden-born son,’ inasmuch as the direct meaning of the term ‘maiden’ is
not applicable, it is taken in its indirect meaning of ‘one who has not
gone through the sacramental rites.’ As for the case where the
sacramental rites are performed even after ‘intercourse,’ such cases are
very rare. Then, as regards the statement—‘when the sacrament is
performed for a pregnant girl, with or without the knowledge of her
being so, etc.’ (9. 173),—this refers to cases where the person
performing the sacramental rites is not the same that has had the
previous intercourse with her; so that this would not be a case of
‘*Paiśāca*’ marriage at all; as in this latter, the girl is given in
marriage to that same person who has had intercourse with her (during
sleep, etc.), and that same person would be performing the rites for
her. Then again, so far as the performance of rites for the pregnant
girl is concerned, it has been directly laid down by scriptural texts.
All this we shall explain in full detail under Discourse IX.

Others, again, have held the view that—“in reality, the *intercourse*
itself is the principal factor; for, if it were not so, there would be
no point in the prohibiting of *intercourse* (with maidens).”

But if ‘intercourse’ were the principal factor, then that itself would
constitute ‘marriage;’ none other being possible, according to the
reasoning just put forward; so that there would be no object for the
prohibition, as ‘intercourse,’ when *voluntary*, would constitute the
*‘Gāndharva*’ marriage; when ‘*forcible*,’ it would be ‘*Rākṣasa*’
marriage; and in other cases it would be ‘*Paiśāca*;’ and no other
‘intercourse,’ without rites is possible, whereby the prohibition could
apply to all forms of ‘intercourse.’ As a matter of fact, however, there
certainly is an object for the prohibition,—in the shape of such cases
where there is forcible intercourse by stealth, or where the girl is
given away by her parents, but no sacramental rites are performed. This
latter cannot come under the ‘*Gāndharva*’ marriage; as it is not
‘voluntary’ on the part of the girl. It is for this reason that in such
a case the husband does not incur the sin of having intercourse with a
‘maiden;’ as this latter contingency happens under totally different
circumstances.

Thus, then, since the performance of sacramental rites has been
interdicted in the case of girls who have already had sexual
intercourse,—and since the ‘*Paiśāca*’ also is, like the ‘Brāhma’ and
the rest, a means (of acquiring a wife),—and since, therefore, this form
also is capable of being culled ‘marriage,’—it follows that what is
denoted by the term ‘*approach*,’ ‘*upagama*’ (‘intercourse’) is only a
secondary factor.

The differentiating characteristics of the eight forms of marriage are
as follows (1) that marriage which comes without asking, just like
landed property, gold and the rest, is ‘*Brāhma*;’ (2) that which comes
by virtue of one’s priestly character is ‘*Daiva*;’ (3) that which is
accompanied by the present of a cow and a bull is ‘*Ārṣa*;’ (4) that
which is accompanied by the condition, ‘may you together perform your
duties,’ and which comes either by or without asking, is ‘*Prājāpatya*;’
the characteristics of the others are easily discerned.

In the words, ‘*Brāhma*,’ etc., the nominal affix denotes *relation*;
and the relationship of Brahma and the rest is ascribed to the marriage,
with a view to eulogising it. So also in the rest. In the case of the
term ‘*Paiśāca*,’ the meaning is ‘that which is fit for Piśācas,’ and it
connotes deprecation.—(34).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 206, l. 20)—‘*Varṇyate chetihāsādiṣu &c*.’;—*e.g*. the
case of Kunti, who was married to Pāṇḍu, after she had given birth to
Karṇa.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 129);—in *Aparārka* (p.
91);—and in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 685).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (4.13).—‘When there is intercourse without the girl’s
knowledge it is the Paiśāca form.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.11.9).—‘When one marries a girl while she is asleep, or
unconscious, or mad, it is the Paiśāca.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.26).—‘It is Paiśāca when one approaches a girl while she is
asleep or unconscious.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.61).—‘It is Paiśāca when the girl is won by stratagem.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.6.6).—‘The carrying away of girls, asleep or
unconscious, constitutes the Paiśāca.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 858).—‘The carrying away of a girl
who is asleep, unconscious or mad, or in distress,—is the Paiśāca, the
eighth form of marriage, based upon want of care.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 858).—‘it is the Paiśāca form when
the girl is won by the employment of women, drinks, wine, and presents.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

034	When (a man) by stealth seduces a girl who is sleeping, intoxicated, or disordered in intellect, that is the eighth, the most base and sinful rite of the Pisakas.
</details>
