+++
title = "049 पुमान् पुंसो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A male child is born when the man’s seed is in excess, and a female child when the woman’s (is in excess); when the two are equal, there is born either a non-male or a boy and a girl; when it is weak and small in quantity, there is failure.—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शुक्रं** वीर्यं पुरुषस्य रेतः, स्त्रियाः शोणितम् । उक्तं भगवता वसिष्ठेन "शुक्रशोणितसंभवः पुरुषः" इति (वध् १५.१) । स्त्रीबीजाद् अधिके पुंबीजे ऽयुग्मास्व् अपि पुत्रो जायते, युग्मास्व् अपि स्त्रीबीजस्याधिक्ये कन्यैव । अयुग्मास्व् अपि रात्रिषु पुत्रार्थिनो गमनानुष्ठानार्थम् एतत् । यदा परिपुष्टम् आत्मानं वृष्याहारयोगेन समधिकवीर्यं मन्येत स्त्रियाश् च कथंचिद् अपचयं तदा पुत्रार्थी गच्छेद् इत्य् उपदिष्टं भवति । आधिक्यं चात्र न परिमाणतः, किं तर्हि सारतः । **समे ऽपुमान्** मिश्रीकृते **पुंस्त्रियौ** । **अपुमान्** नपुंसकम् इति केचित् । अन्ये[^११७] साम्य इति पठन्ति । उभयोः साम्ये पुमान् एव । **पुंस्त्रियौ वा** । गर्भाधान्यां यदा वायुर् द्रवरूपत्वात् संसृष्टे शुक्रशोणिते समं विभजत एकत्र भागम् अन्यत्र तावद् एव तदा यमौ जायेते । तत्र समे विभागे ऽपि स्त्रीबीजाधिक्ये स्त्री, पुंबीजाधिक्ये पुमान् । **क्षीणे** बीजे सारतः **विपर्ययो** ऽग्रहणं[^११८] गर्भस्य नपुंसकोत्पत्तिर् वा ॥ ३.४९ ॥


[^११८]:
     M G 1st ed.: 'lpagrahaṇaṃ


[^११७]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: anye
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Seed*’—the man’s semen, and the woman’s ovule. Says the revered
Vaśiṣṭha—‘man is the product of semen and ovule’ (15.1).

When the man’s ‘seed’ is in excess of the woman’s, then, even on the
uneven days, a male child is conceived; similarly, on the even days also
a female child becomes conceived, if the woman’s ‘seed’ happens to be in
excess.

This statement is meant to lead the man seeking for a son to have
intercourse with his wife on the uneven days also; the sense of the
instruction being that—when the man finds that by the use of
aphrodisiacs and strengthening food he has become vigorous in his
virility, and that his wife has, for some reason or other, become weak,
then he should have intercourse with her, when desirous of getting a
son.

The ‘*excess*’ meant here is not that in *quantity*, but that in
*virility*.

*When the two are equal*, *there in burn either a non-male*, *or a boy*
and a *girl, together*. ‘*Non-male*’ stands for the hermaphrodite,
according to some people.

Some people read ‘*sāmye*;’ and it means that ‘in case of equality of
both, a non-male is born.’

‘*Or a boy and a girl*’—When the wind in the womb stirs up the mixed
semen and ovula and divides it into two equal parts—a small quantity in
-one part, and an equal quantity in another part of the womb,—then twins
are born; and in those two equal parts also, in that part where the
woman’s seed happens to be in excess the girl is born, while in the
other part, where the male’s seed is in excess, the boy is born.

When the seed is weak—in virility—then ‘*there is failure*;’ either
non-conception, or the birth of a hermaphrodite.—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 499), which remarks
that in the second line the words are ‘*same apumān*’;—and in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 617).

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 160) quotes this verse and adds the
following notes:—‘*Śukra*’ in the man’s case is semen; and in that of
the woman, the red ovule;—Vaśiṣṭha has declared that the human body is
made up of the semen and the ovule;—if the man’s seed happens to be in
excess of the woman’s, then the child is male, even though the sexual
intercourse might have taken place on an odd day of the period; but with
this difference that the male child born under such circumstances would
have an effeminate body;—in the event of the woman’s seed being in
excess of the man’s the child is female, even though the intercourse
might have taken place on an even day of the period; but in this case
the female child would have a masculine body;—and the reason for this
mixed character consists in the fact that the effect of the seed, which
is the material cause of the child’s body, is more potent than that of
the time of conception, which is only a ‘concomitant cause’;—when the
two seeds are in equal quantity, the child is either ‘non-male’ *i.e*.,
a eunuch, or a boy and girl—*i.e*., twins,—this latter being caused by
the bifurcation of the seed at the time of emission, leading to two
portions of it falling on two different parts of the womb.

The verse is also quoted in the *Āhnika* section (p. 559) of
*Vīramitrodaya* where we find the following notes:—

‘*Same*’—when the man’s seed and the woman’s are equal—there is born
either a non-male, a eunuch, or ‘a boy and girl’;—the seeds being
bifurcated into two parts in.equal quantities, twins, consisting of one
boy and one girl, are born;—‘*Kṣīṇe*’—when the seed is weak,—and
‘*alpe*’—small in quantity, there is ‘*viparyaya*’—failure of
conception.

This is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 16), which adds that if the
intercourse takes place on an ‘even’ day but the proportion of the
woman’s ‘seed’ is larger, then the child will be a female one, but with
masculine features; and if it takes place on an odd day and the
proportion of the man’s ‘seed’ is larger, then the child will be a male
one, but with feminine features;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 683), which
explains ‘*apumān*’ as ‘sexless’ and there are two children, one male
and another female, if the seed become divided;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p, 25a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 40) which
explains ‘*Same*’ as ‘when there is equality of the two-seeds,’ and adds
the same notes as those in the *Mayūkha*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.45-50)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.45].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

049	A male child is produced by a greater quantity of male seed, a female child by the prevalence of the female; if (both are) equal, a hermaphrodite or a boy and a girl; if (both are) weak or deficient in quantity, a failure of conception (results).
</details>
