+++
title = "067 वैवाहिके ऽग्नौ"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the marriage-fire the householder should perform the ‘gṛhya’ rites; as also the rite of the ‘five sacrifices’ and the daily cooking.—(67)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिक्रान्तं विवाहप्रकरणम् । कृतो विवाहो यस्मिन्न् **अग्नौ** तत्र **कुर्वीत गृह्यं कर्म**, अग्निसाध्यम् अष्टकापार्वणश्राद्धहोमादि गृह्यस्मृतिकारैर् उक्तम् । **पञ्चयज्ञा** वक्ष्यमाणास् तेषां **विधानम्** अनुष्ठानम्, तस्मिन्न् एवाग्नौ । 

- <u>यद्य्</u> अप्य् अविशेषेण **पञ्चयज्ञविधानम्** इत्य् उक्तं तथापि वैश्वदेवहोमो ऽग्निसाध्यः, उदकतर्पणादौ तु न किंचिद् अग्निना कार्यम् । कथं तर्हि निर्देशो ऽग्नौ पञ्चयज्ञविधानं कार्यम् इति । 

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुर् एकापि सप्तमी विषयभेदाद् भिद्यते । तस्मात् पञ्चयज्ञैकदेशे पञ्चयज्ञशब्दः प्रयुक्तः । 

- <u>अथ वा</u> **पञ्चयज्ञविधानम्** इत्य् अत्र **अग्नाउ** इति न संबध्यते, वैश्वदेवहोमस्य पूर्वेणैवाग्न्यधिकरणस्य सिद्धत्वात् । एवं संबन्धः क्रियते- गृही तु **पञ्चयज्ञविधानं** कुर्यात् । **अग्नौ** तु **वैवाहिके** गृह्यकर्मपक्तिं[^१२२] **चान्वाहिकीम्** अग्नाव् इत्य् अपेक्ष्यते । 


[^१२२]:
     M G: gṛhadharmapaktiṃ

- गृहशब्दो दारवचनः । **गृही** तु स कृतदारपरिग्रहो[^१२३] भार्याद्वितीय इदम् इदं कुर्याद् इति । विवाहे चाग्निः कैश्चिद् गृह्यकारैर् अरणिनिर्मन्थनाद् आधातव्य इत्य् उक्तम् । अपरैर् यतः कुतश्चिद् दीप्यमानम् आनीय होतव्यम् इति । अनेन तस्मिन् **गृह्यम्** इति वचनेन धारणम् अग्नेर् अर्थाद् उक्तं भवति । 


[^१२३]:
     M G 1st ed.: satkṛtadāra-

- <u>अत्र केचिद्</u> आहुः । शूद्रस्यापि वैवाहिकाग्निधारणम् अस्ति, तस्यापि पाकयज्ञाधिकारात् । न चात्र जातिविशेष उपात्तः,  केवलं "**गृही**" इति श्रुतम् । शूद्रो ऽपि गृही, तस्यापि दारपरिग्रहस्योक्तत्वात् । एतद् एवान्यत्र पठितम् ।

- कर्म स्मार्थं विवाहाग्नौ कुर्वीत प्रयहं गृही । इति । (य्ध् १.९६)

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । **गृह्यं कर्म वैवाहिके ऽग्नाव्** इति श्रुतम् । न च गृह्यं नाम किंचित् कर्मास्ति । तत्र गृह्यस्मृतिकारोक्तं गृह्यम् इति लक्षणया मन्तव्यम् । गृह्यकारैश् च त्रैवर्णिकानां एव कर्माम्नातम्, न शूद्रस्य- "उक्तानि वैतानिकानि गृह्याणि वक्ष्यामः" (आश्ग् १.१.१) इति । उक्तानुकीर्तनस्य एतद् एव प्रयोजनं येषाम् एव वैतानिकेष्व् अधिकारस् तेषाम् एव गृह्येष्व् इति, न पुनर् यथान्यैर् व्याख्यातं तद् धर्मप्रात्यर्थम् । तादर्थ्ये हि विवक्षिते "तस्याग्निहोत्रेण प्रादुष्करणहोमकालौ व्याख्यातौ" (आश्ग् १.९.४) इति नावक्ष्यत् । न च गृहे भवं गृह्यम् इति युक्तम् । शालावचनो गृहशब्दो दारवचनो वा । न तावत् कस्यचित् कर्मणः शालाधिकरणत्वेन विशेषतः समाम्नाता यद् गृहम् इत्य् अनूद्य गृहिणो विधीयते । यद् अपि गृहसंस्कारकं वास्तुपरीक्षादि तद् अपि त्रैवर्णिकानाम् एव, न शूद्रस्य । अथ दारवचनस् तत्रापि गृहीत्य् अनेनैव गतत्वान् न किंचित् । 

- यद् अपि[^१२४] स्मृत्यन्तरम्-


[^१२४]:
     M G: yady api

- कर्म स्मार्तं विवाहाग्नौ कुर्वीत प्रत्यहं गृही ।

- दायकालाह्र्ते वापि श्रौतं वैतानिकाग्निषु ॥ (य्ध् १.९७)

इति, अत्रापि किंचित् स्मार्तम् इति विशेषानुपादानाद् अन्यसापेक्षतैव । न हि सर्वम् अग्नौ स्मार्तं कर्म संभवति । न च होमविषयत्वे प्रमाणम् अस्ति । न ह्य् अवश्यम् अग्न्यधिकरण एव होमः । 

- तस्माद् गृह्यकारोक्तं **गृह्यम्** इति वक्तव्यम् । एते हि स्मृती गृह्यकारविहितं कर्मानुवदतः । तथा च कुतः शूद्रस्याग्निपरिग्रहः । किं च "श्रौतं वैतानिकाग्निषु" इति अपरं तत्राम्नायते, तत्र अवश्यम् अयं त्रैवर्णिकविषय एषितव्यः । स एव पूर्वत्र चातुर्वर्ण्यपर उत्तरत्र त्रैवर्णिकपर इत्य् एकस्य शब्दस्य तात्पर्यभेदो ऽभ्युपगतः स्यात् । न चाभेदे संभवति भेदो न्याय्यः । अन्वहं भव्**आन्वाहिक्**ई । प्रतिदिवसं यः पाको भुक्त्यर्थः स तस्मिन्न् एवाग्नौ कर्तव्यः ॥ ३.५७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The section on Marriage is finished.

In the fire in which the marriage-rites have been performed, one should
perform the ‘Gṛhya rites,’—*i.e*., rites that have been prescribed by
the authors of *Gṛhyasūtras* as to be performed with the help of fire;
*e.g*., the *Aṣṭakā śrāddha*, the *Pārvaṇaśrāddha*, Libations, and so
forth.

‘*Five sacrifices*’—to be described later on;—‘*the rite*,’ the
performance of these—(should be done) in that same fire.

“Though the text speaks of the ‘five sacrifices’ without any
specification, yet (among them) the Vaiśvadeva-offering alone is to be
made in the fire; in the offering of the water-libations, etc., there is
no need for the fire. Why then should the text speak of the ‘rite of
five sacrfices’ as to be performed *in the fire*?”

Some people explain that, though the locative ending is one only, yet it
may be regarded as diverse in reference to the diversity in the objects;
hence, in the present context, the term ‘five sacrifices’ has been used
in the sense of a part only of the five sacrifices.’

Or (another explanation is that), the phrase, ‘*in the* *f* *ire*,’ is
not to be construed with the ‘*rite of the five sacrifices*,’—the
Vaiśvadeva-offering, which is made into fire, being already included in
the preceding phrase (‘*gṛhya* rite ’). The construction in this case
would be—‘the Householder should perform the rite of the five
sacrifices, and in the Marriage-fire he should perform the *gṛhya* or
domestic rites, as also the daily cooking.’

The term ‘*gṛha*,’ *house*,’ denotes *wife*; hence what is meant is that
the ‘*householder*,’ *i.e*., one, who has married a wife, should perform
the rites, in association with one’s wife.

Some writers on the Gṛhyasūtras have declared that at marriage, fire
should be produced by the friction of two sticks; while, according to
others, one may bring burning fire from anywhere he likes and make his
offerings into that.

The injunction that the domestic rites shall be performed in the
marriage-fire implies that the fire kindled at marriage shall be kept
up.

On this point some people make the following observations:—The
maintaining of the marriage-fire should be necessary for the *Śūdra*
also; as for him. also the performance of the ‘*Pākayajña*’ has been
ordained; nor does the present text specify any particular caste; all
that is found is the general term ‘householder,’ and the *Śūdra* also is
a ‘householder,’ the marrying of a wife being prescribed for him also.
This is what has beeu declared elsewhere (in Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra*,
97)—‘The householder should everyday perform the *smārta* rites in the
marriage-tire.’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What has been declared is that
‘Gṛhya rites are to be performed in the marriage-fire;’ but there is no
special rite named ‘*gṛhya*;’ hence the name ‘*gṛhya*’ should be taken
as indirectly indicating the rites prescribed by writers on
*Gṛhyasūtras*; and these writers have prescribed the rites for the three
higher castes only, and not for the *Śūdra*. In fact, in the Gṛhyasūtras
we find a summing up in the words—‘The sacrificial rites have been
described, we are now going to describe the Gṛhya rites;’ and the
purpose for which these words have beeu added is to imply that ‘those
persons only are entitled to the performance of the *Gṛhya* rites who
are entitled to that of the *sacrificial* ones;’ and it is not meant, as
it has been explained by others, that the latter constitute the duty of
others also. If this had been meant, then it would not have been
asserted that—‘the times for *Prāduṣkaraṇa* and Homa are analogous to
those of the *Agnihotra*.’ Nor, again, is it right to take the term
‘*gṛhya*’ to mean ‘pertaining to the home’ (domestic); for the term
‘home’ (*gṛha*) could only mean either ‘house’ or ‘wife;’ now, as a
matter of fact, for no rite has the ‘house’ been specifically prescribed
as the location, in view of which the rite could be prescribed for the
householder in terms of the ‘house,’ Then, again, such rites also as are
performed for the sanctification of one’s house—such for instance, as
the testing of the building-site, and so forth—have been prescribed for
the three higher castes only, and not for the *Śūdra*. If, on the other
hand, the term ‘home’ means the ‘wife,’ then the act meant having been
already implied by the term ‘householder,’ the name ‘*gṛhya*’ would be
superfluous.

As for the statement in the other *Smṛti* (Yājavalkya, *Ācāra* 97)—‘The
householder should every-day perform *Smārta* rites in the
Marriage-fire, or in the fire set up at the time of partition, and the
*Śrauta* rites in the sacrificial fires,’—here also, since it has not
been specifically stated what the ‘*smārta* rites’ are, the statement
must be taken as qualified by some other statement; specially because,
as a matter of fact, all *smārta* rites cannot be performed in fire; nor
is there anything to indicate that the term refers to *Homa* (offerings
into fire) only; nor, again, is it necessary that all *Homa* -offerings
shall be made into fire.

From all this the term ‘gṛhya’ has to be explained as standing for the
*rites prescribed by the* authors of *Gṛhyasūtras*. Both these *smṛti-*
texts (the present one, and Yājñavalkya I, 97) only refer to what has
been prescribed by the authors of *Gṛhyasūtras*. So that how could there
be any setting up of the fire by a *Śūdra?*

Further, Yājñavalkya’s text lays down the additional fact that ‘Śrauta
rites are to be performed in the sacrificial fire;’ and this must be
taken as pertaining to the three higher castes only. Under the
circumstances, if the former statement (regarding *smārta* rites) were
taken as pertaining to all the four castes, and the latter (regarding
the *śrauta* rites) to three castes only, then this would involve the
incongruity of one and the same set of words having two different
imports. And, so long as a uniform import can be found, there can be no
justification for admitting such a diversity.

‘*Daily*’—that which is done day after day; *e.g*., the cooking that is
done every day for one’s own food;—this also is to be done in the same
fire.—(67)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 217, l. 27)—‘*Etadevānyatra paṭhitam*’.—The verse is
quoted from Yājñavalkya (1.97), where *Mitākṣarā* explains the phrase
‘*smārtam karma*’ as ‘the Vaiśvadeva and other religious rites
prescribed in the *Smṛtis*’, as also ‘the ordinary worldly acts of
cooking and the like’, while *Aparārka* explains it simply as ‘acts laid
down in the *Smṛtis*’.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 301);—and in *Śāntimayūkha*
(p. 4).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (5.7-9).—‘The installation of Fire begins either with marriage
or with succession to property; in that are the Gṛhya-rites to be
performed; as also the sacrifices to Gods, Pitṛs and Men, and also Vedic
Study.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 97).—‘The Householder should every day perform the
Smārta-rites in the marriage-tire, or in the fire installed at the time
of succession to property; and the Śrauta rites are to he performed in
the Śrauta Fire.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.1-3).—‘The Householder shall perform the Pākayajñas in the
Marriage-Fire; also the Agnihotra, both morning and evening; he shall
also pour libations to the Gods.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.75).—‘The installation of Fire begins with marriage;
in that should the rites be performed till such time as the regular
Laying of the Fire.’

*Śātātapa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 393).—‘The Vaiśvadeva offering may
be made either in the ordinary fire or in the Vedic fire.’

*Aṅgiras* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 393).—‘Homa is prescribed as to be
done in that fire in which one cooks his food.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 393).—‘All the Pākayajñas are to he
offered in the Marriage Fire.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.25-26).—‘The duties of a Householder are to perform the
Agnihotra, to live by the prescribed professions and to avoid sexual
intercourse on the Parvas. The duties of those who have married and
settled down are—to worship gods, pitṛs and guests, to show mercy to the
poor and the distressed and to live according to *Śruti* and *Smṛti*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

067	With the sacred fire, kindled at the wedding, a householder shall perform according to the law the domestic ceremonies and the five (great) sacrifices, and (with that) he shall daily cook his food.
</details>
