+++
title = "068 पञ्च सूना"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the householder there are five slaughter-houses: the hearth, the grinding-stone, household implements, mortar and pestle and water-jar;—by using which he becomes stricken.—(68)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पञ्चयज्ञविधेर् अधिकारनिर्देशो ऽयम् । सूना इव **सूनाः** । मांसविक्रयार्थपशुवधस्थानम् आपणदयो वा मांसस्योत्पादकतयानुष्ठीयमानाः पापहेतवः । एवं **चुल्ल्या**दयो ऽपि पापहेतुत्वाद् अध्यारोपेण सूनासमाः । न हि तेषां शास्त्रप्रतिषेधः साक्षात् । नापि सामान्यः कश्चित् प्रतिषेधो ऽस्ति । न हि तापघाताय कस्यचिन् न स्पृहा स्यात् । न काचित् तत्साध्यक्रिया दृश्यते या वचनान्तरेण निषिद्धा । न चास्माद् एव वचनात् प्रतिषेधानुमानम्, उत्तरेणैकवाक्यतावगमात् । प्रतिषेधपरत्वे वाक्यभेदः स्यात् । किं चैतत्पदार्थसाध्याम् अर्थक्रियां पदार्थान्तरेण साधयेत् तस्याः प्राप्तिं पञ्चयज्ञानाम् । न च लक्षणान्य् उक्तानि । येन तत्समानकार्यस्यान्यस्यापि प्रतिषेध उच्यते । यो वा परकीयम् अन्नम् अध्यान् नद्यादाव् उदकार्थं कुर्यात्[^१२५] तस्यैते यज्ञाः स्युः । यदि च चुल्ल्यादीनां निषेधो ऽभिप्रेतः स्यात् तदा प्रतिषेधार्थीयम् एव पदम् अधीयीत, किम् अनुमानेन । स्वशब्दाद् बलीयसी प्रतिपत्तिः । प्रायश्चित्तार्थत्वे त्व् एकादशे ऽभिधानं युक्तम्[^१२६] । निषेधैर् एवाननुष्ठानम् एव स्यात् । अपरिहार्यत्वाच् च चुल्ल्यादीनाम् अशक्यो निषेधः । असति च निषेधे कुतः प्रायश्चित्तम् । 


[^१२६]:
     M G: na yuktaṃ


[^१२५]:
     M G: kuryān na

- तस्मान् न दोषविघातार्थं पञ्चमहायज्ञाः । किं तर्हि नित्यसंबन्धेषु चुल्ल्यादिष्व् आरोपितासद्दोषनिष्कृत्यर्थतया[^१२७] नित्यार्थतया नित्यत्वं यज्ञानाम् आह । 


[^१२७]:
     M G: cullyādidhāraṇe 'pi taddoṣaḥ tanniṣkṛtyarthatayā

- **वध्यते** । आदिवर्णं वेत्य् एतद् दन्तोष्ठ्यं पठ्यते । हन्यते दुष्कृतेन, शरीरधनादिना नाश्यते । संबध्यते वा पापेन- परतन्त्रीकरणं वा बध्नातेर् अर्थः । 

- **वाहयन्** । स्वकार्ये व्यापरणं वाहनम् । यस्य चुल्ल्यादेर् यदौचित्यप्राप्तं स्वसाध्यं कार्यं तत् ताभिः कुर्वन् वाहयन्न् इत्य् उच्यते । 

- **चुल्ली** पाकस्थानं भ्राष्ट्रादि । **पेषणी** दृषदुपलो वा । **उपस्करो** गृहोपयोगि भाण्डं कुण्डकटाहादि । **कण्डनी** यया व्रीह्यादि कण्ड्यते । **कुम्भो** जलाधारः ॥ ३.५८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse serves to indicate the occasion for the prescribing of the
‘five sacrifices.’

‘*Slaughter-houses*’—*i.e*., it is as if they were slaughterhouses.
Places where animals are killed for the purpose of their flesh being
sold, or those where meat is sold, become sources of sin, by being used
for the purpose of obtaining meat; similarly, the hearth and other
things also, being sources of sin, come to resemble the
‘slaughter-house.’

As a matter of fact, there is no direct scriptural prohibition bearing
specifically upon the ‘hearth’ and other things; nor is there any
general prohibition regarding them. It is not impossible for men to have
a desire for the heat (provided by the hearth). We do not find any such
*acts* as are accomplished by means of the hearth, etc., which could be
prohibited by other texts. Nor can the prohibition be inferred from what
is stated in the present text itself; for the simple reason that it is
clearly understood as to be construed along with the next verse (which
is an *injunction*, not a *prohibition*); so that, if the present text
were taken as a prohibition, this would involve a syntactical split; and
further (the use of the Hearth, etc., being prohibited by this verse)
the occasion for the performance of the ‘Five Sacrifices’ would be
afforded only when the acts that are done by means of the Hearth, etc.,
would be done by means of other things. Nor, again, have the peculiar
characteristics (of such acts) have been described anywhere, the
presence whereof would indicate the similarity of certain acts (to the
acts accomplished by means of Hearth, etc.) and their consequent
prohibition. And a further result of this being taken as the prohibition
of the Hearth, etc., and as such having no connection with the
injunction of the sacrifices, would be that the sacrifices would be
performed by such men as would eat food cooked by others (and thus avoid
the use of the Hearth), or would use water directly from the river and
other reservoirs (thus avoiding the use of the water-jar). Then, again,
if a prohibition of the Hearth, etc., were intended, then directly
prohibitive words would have been used in the text; why should it have
been left to be inferred? Direct assertion is always more forcible, if
the prohibitive implication were admitted for the purpose of indicating
the expiatory rites to be performed in connection with the acts,—then
the right thing would have been to include it under Discourse XI (where
expiatory rites are dealt with). Further, such a prohibition might lead
to the abandoning of the particular acts; but the use of the Hearth
cannot be avoided; hence there can be no prohibition of them; and there
being no prohibition, wherefore would there be any expiatory rite?

From all this it follows that the ‘Five Great Sacrifices’ are not to be
performed for the destroying of sins; bub what is meant by saying that
they serve to expiate,—destroy—the sin involved in the using of the
Hearth, etc., which cannot be avoided for a single day—is that the daily
performance of the sacrifices is absolutely essential and compulsory.

‘*Becomes stricken*’—the first consonant is *v*; and the meaning is that
‘he is stricken by sin, and is ruined in regard to his body and
belongings, etc.;—or, (if we read *ba*) the meaning may be that ‘be
becomes connected with (tainted with) sin the root (in ‘*badhyate*’)
denoting *overpowering*.

‘*Using*’—*i.e*., employing for one’s purpose. When a man employs the
hearth and other things for such purposes as present themselves, he is
said to ‘use’ them.

*Hearth*.—place of cooking; the oven, etc.

‘*Grinding-stone*’—the stone-slab, and the grinding piece.

‘*Household implement*’—such things as the pot, kettle and such other
household requisites.

‘*Pestle and mortar*’—by which corn is thumped.

‘*Water-jar*’—the pot containing water.—(68)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Upaskaraḥ*’—‘The pot, the kettle and other household implements’
(Medhātithi);—‘a pot, a broom and the rest’ (Kullūka);—‘a broom and the
rest’ (Rāghavānanda);—all these take the word in the collective sense,
including all ‘household implements’;—Nārāyaṇa alone takes it in the
purely singular sense of ‘the broom’ only.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 533) as laying down the
sources of ‘the sin of the slaughter house’;—it adds the following
explanations:—‘*Sūnā*’ means occasions for killing’;—‘*cullī*’ is the
cooking place’;—‘*Peṣaṇī*’ ‘grinding stone’;—‘*upaskaraḥ*’ ‘the broom
and the rest’;—‘*Kaṇḍanī*,’ ‘mortar and pestle’;—by making use of these
the man incurs sin.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 389) quotes the verse and adds the following
explanations:—‘*Sūnā*’ is ‘occasion for the killing of living
beings’;—‘*Upaskaraḥ*’ is ‘the broom, the pot, the stick and the rest’;
‘*bādhyate*’ (which is its reading for ‘*badhyate*’) means ‘is
stricken—*i.e*., by sin accruing from the killing of
animals’;—‘*vāhayan*’ means ‘making use of,’ ‘operating.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (59.19).—‘Mortar and pestle, Grinding stone, Hearth, Water-jar,
Household Implements;—these are the five slaughter-houses for the
Householder.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 389).—‘We are going to describe the
*Sūnās* or slaughterings—by which is meant *that which destroys living
beings*; these are of five kinds: The first *slaughtering* is done by
people hurriedly entering water, by swimming, splashing, throwing about
of water, catching of impurities, and moving in water; (2) the second
they do by hurriedly walking in darkness or in dim light, or by
trampling (upon insects); (3) the third they do by striking, collecting,
capturing, grinding, tearing and so forth; (4) the fourth they do by
attacking, rubbing, pounding and so forth; (5) the fifth by tiring,
heating, sweating, frying, cooking and so forth. These are the five
*slaughterings*, t he source of sin, which people do day by day.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

068	A householder has five slaughter-houses (as it were, viz.) the hearth, the grinding-stone, the broom, the pestle and mortar, the water-vessel, by using which he is bound (with the fetters of sin).
</details>
