+++
title = "070 अध्यापनम् ब्रह्मयज्ञः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Teaching is the ‘offering to Brahma;’ the Tarpaṇa is the ‘offering to Pitṛs;’ the Homa is ‘offering to Gods;’ the Bali is ‘offering to elementals;’ and the honouring of Guests is ‘offering to men.’—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एषाम् अयं स्वरूपविधिः । **अध्यापन**शब्देनाध्ययनम् अपि गृह्यते येन "जपो ऽहुतः" (म्ध् ३.६४) इत्य् अत्र वक्ष्यति । न च जपो ऽपि शिष्यान् अपेक्षते । सामान्येन च[^१२८] श्रुतं "स्वाध्यायेनर्षिभ्यः" इत्य् ऋणावेदनश्रुतौ (त्स् ६.३.१०.५) । अत उभे अध्यापनाध्ययने यथासंभवं **ब्रह्मयज्ञः** । **तर्पणम्** अन्नाद्येनोदकेन वेति वक्ष्यति (म्ध् ३.७२) । **होमो** वक्ष्यमाणाभ्यो देवताभ्यो ऽग्नौ । **बलिः** शिष्ट उलूखलादौ च । स **भौतः** । भूतादिदेवतास्येति **भौतः** । नामधेयम् एतत् कर्मविशेषस्य । दिवाचारिभ्यो भूतेभ्य इति हि तत्र बलिहरणं भूतशब्देन विहितम् । साहचर्यात् सर्व एष कर्मगणो भूतयज्ञशब्देनोच्यते । यथा चातुर्मास्येष्व् एकं हविर् वैश्वदेवम् आमिक्षा- कृत्स्नम् एव च पर्व वैश्वदेवेन यजेतेति । बलिशब्दो ऽनग्निहोमे वर्तते । देवेज्याबलिर् इति स्मरन्ति । **अतिथीनां पूजनम्** आराधनां **नृयज्ञः** ।


[^१२८]:
     M G omit: ca

- <u>ननु</u> च स्वाध्यायः कथं यज्ञः । न हि तत्र देवता इज्यन्ते नापि श्रूयन्ते । केवलं वेदाक्षराण्य् अविवक्षितार्थान्य् उच्चार्यन्ते । उक्तं चाम्नायशब्दाभ्यासे केचिद् आहुर् अनर्थकानीति ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । स्तुत्यां यज्ञसब्दो भाक्तः महच्छब्दश् च । अतिथिपूजायाम् अपि भाक्तो[^१२९] यज्ञशब्दः । यद्य् अप्य् अतिथेर् देवतात्वं संभवति, तथाप्य् उत्पत्तौ भोजयेत् पूजयेद् इति च श्रुतं नातिथिभ्यो यजेतेति । यथा "पुरुषराजाय[^१३०] यत् कर्म वा" इति ।


[^१३०]:
     M G 1st ed.: puruṣarājaḥ


[^१२९]:
     M G: iti cokto

- एते पञ्चयज्ञा न युगपत् प्रयोज्याः, एकाधिकारासंबन्धात् पृथग् अधिकारश्रवणात् । एकाधिकारसंबन्धत्वे त्रिषु चतुर्षु वा कृतेषु न किंचित् कृतं स्याद् यावत् कृतं च न क्र्तं । यथाग्नेयाग्नीषोमीयोपांशुयागानां दर्शपूर्णमासयागानाम् एकद्व्यनुष्ठाने नाधिकारसिद्धिः । यथात्रैव वैश्वदेवहोमे स्विष्टकृदन्तानां देवतानां कस्यांश्चिद् अन्तराये न होमाधिकारनिर्वृत्तिः । एकैकस्य चात्राधिकारः श्रुतः । "स्वाध्याये नित्ययुक्तः स्यात्" (म्ध् ३.६५), "दैवे च नित्ययुक्तः स्यात्" (म्ध् ३.६५) इति । अधिकारपदानुषङ्गेण पृथक्प्रयोगः । आतिथ्ये चाधिकारान्तरं श्रुतं "धन्यं यशस्यम्" (म्ध् ३.९६) इति । 

- तत्र चत्वारः स्वाधीनाः, आतिथ्यं तु संनिहिते ऽतिथौ । न चातिथिर् निमन्त्रयितव्यः, आतिथ्याभावात् । स्वयम् उपस्थितो ह्य् अतिथिर् भवतीति वक्ष्यामः । तस्मात् पञ्चानाम् अन्यतमानुष्ठाने इतरेषाम् अननुष्ठानाद् यदि नाम प्रत्यवेयान् न तु कृतं अकृतं भवति । अतो ऽनग्निकत्वाद् वैश्वदेवे ऽनधिकृतस्य स्वाध्यायोदकतर्पणादौ भवत्य् एवाधिकारः । अग्निपरिग्रहस्य च स्मृत्यन्तरे कालान्तरस्यापि श्रुतत्वान् नावश्यं विवाह एव परिग्रहः । एवं हि स्मृतिः "भार्यादिर् अग्निर् दायादिर् वा" (ग्ध् ५.७) इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाकृतविवाहस्य दायकालम् आधानं भविष्यति ।

- <u>भवति</u> ह्य् एतद् एवं यद्य् आधानविधिः[^१३१] स्वार्थः स्यात् । अग्न्यर्थं त्व् आधानम् । अग्निश् च कर्मार्थः । कर्माणि च भार्याद्वितीयस्य, न केवलस्य, श्रुतानि । यद् अपि[^१३२] कैश्चिद् गृह्यकारैः परमेष्ठिप्राणाग्निम् आधाय श्राद्धं कुर्याद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति, तद् अपि सभार्यस्यैव । स एवास्य दायकालः । न चानग्निकस्य श्राद्धं नास्ति । अनुपनीतस्यापि ह्य् एतद् विहितम् "अन्यत्र स्वधानिनयनात्" (ग्ध् २.५) इति । न च तस्याधानम् अस्ति, विदुषो ऽधिकाराद् इदानीं चाविद्यत्वात् । श्राद्धं तु वचनान् निषादस्थपतिवद् यथाशक्ति कार्यम् इति । पितृव्यादिनाग्निपरिग्रहे तु विदुषां संभवान् नावैद्यस्याधिकारः । अथ श्राद्धप्रकरण एवाग्न्याधानं विहितं तदा तदङ्गत्वेनाधाय निष्पन्ने श्राद्धे परित्यागो भविष्यति ।


[^१३२]:
     M G: yady api


[^१३१]:
     M G: yathādhānavidhiḥ

- <u>केचित्</u> तु स्मृत्यन्तरम् उदाहरन्ति- "लौकिके ऽप्य् अग्नौ वैश्वदेवहोमः कर्तव्यः" । शुष्कान्नैर् <u>अपरे</u> ॥ ३.६० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse contains the injunction of the exact form of the Five
Sacrifices.

The term ‘*teaching*’ here includes ‘learning’ also: as will be
explained in verse 74 below. The mere act of ‘reciting’ does not require
any pupils. In the Vedic text describing the ‘debts’ of man, it has been
stated in general terms that ‘by means of Vedic study one pays off one’s
debts to the sages.’ For these reasons, both ‘teaching’ and ‘learning,’
according to circumstances, constitute ‘the offering to Brahma.’

‘*Tarpaṇa*’—the offering of ‘food or water,’ as described below, in 82.

‘*Homa*’—the offering into fire made to the deities to be described
later on.

‘*Bali*’—*i.e*., offering made into receptacles other than fire, such as
the wooden mortar and the like. This is the ‘*offering to
elementals*;’—*i.e*., the offering made in honour of the elementals.
This is only the name of a particular rite.

The making of offerings has been prescribed under the name of ‘*bhūta*,’
‘lemental,’ in the text—‘offerings made to elementals stalking during
the day, etc., etc.;’ and through association, the whole set of rites is
expressed by the term ‘offering to elementals.’ Just as among the
‘*Cāturmāsya*’ sacrifices, though the *Āmikṣā* is the only one substance
that is offered to the Viśvedevas, yet the entire set of rites has been
spoken of us ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ in the injunction, ‘one should offer the
*Vaiśvadeva* sacrifice.’ The term ‘*bali*’ is applied to such *Homas* as
are offered into receptacles other than fire; and they explain that
‘*bali* is offering to the gods.’

The ‘*honouring*’—*i.e*., receiving—‘*of guests*’ constitutes the
‘offering to men.’

“How can *Vedic study* be a ‘sacrifice?’ In it there are no offerings
made to gods; nor has any deity been mentioned in connection with it;
all that is done in it is that the letters of the Veda, without any
sense, are recited; and it has been said in connection with the
repeating of Vedic texts that some people say the words have no
meaning.”

True; the term ‘sacrifice,’ as also the term ‘great,’ are used (in this
connection) only figuratively, and they are meant to indicate high
praise. To the ‘honouring of guests,’ also the name ‘sacrifice’ is
applied only figuratively. Though it is possible for the Guest to be
regarded as a ‘deity,’ yet in the original injunction of the act, the
injunctive verbs used are ‘should feed,’ ‘should honour,’ and not
‘*should sacrifice*’ to guests. Just as we find in the expression
‘*puruṣarājāya karma vā*’ (where the act done in honour of the king of
men is also called ‘sacrifice.’)

These ‘Five Sacrifices’ are not to be performed simultaneously; because
the occasion for all is not the same; in fact, a distinct occasion has
been mentioned in relation to each. If the occasion for all were one and
the same, then, even when three or four of them would be done, it would
be as good as not done, till all the five were done. Just as in the case
of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifice, (which?) consists of the three
sacrifices of the *Āgneya*, the *Agnīṣomīya* and the *Upāṃśu*, the
performance of only one or two of these does not discharge the complete
liability; and just as among the Domestic Rites themselves, the
‘Vaiśvadeva offering,’ which extends up to the ‘*Sviṣṭakṛt*’ offering,
is not regarded as complete, so long as there is a break in the offering
to any single deity. In fact, each of the five sacrifices has a distinct
occasion mentioned in relation to itself:—*e.g*. (1) ‘one should be
constantly addicted to Vedic study’ (verse 75), (2) ‘one should be
constantly addicted to making offerings to the gods’ (verse 75), and so
forth; and the prescribed occasion being distinct for each, each is
performed separately by itself; (3) as regards ‘honouring of the guest,’
the injunction for this appears quite distinctly (in 105), where the act
is described as ‘conducive to prosperity and fame.’

Further, of these five ‘sacrifices,’ the performance of four depends
upon the man himself; while that of ‘honouring the guest’ is conditional
upon the arrival of the guest. The guest is not to be invited; as in
that case he would not he a ‘guest’ (in the proper sense of the term);
as we shall explain later on that a person is a ‘guest’ only when he
comes of his own accord (unexpectedly). Thus, then, from among the five,
if one performs any one only and omits the rest,—one might incur the sin
of omitting to do what one should do; but what he has done does not
become as good as not done. It is for this reason that when a man has
not set up his own fire, though he is not, on that account, entitled to
the *Vaiśvadeva Homa*, yet it is incumbent upon him to perform ‘Vedic
Study,’ ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ and the rest. As for the setting up of one’s own
fire, other Smṛtis permit of this being done at other times also; it is
not necessary to set it up along with marriage itself. Says the
Smṛti—‘the setting up of the Fire begins either with marriage or with
succession.’

“The option of setting up the Fire at the time of succession may he
regarded as applicable only to one who has not married at all.”

This would he so if the setting up of the Fire were an end in itself. As
a matter of fact, however, the ‘setting up’ is for the purpose of
obtaining the Fire, and the Fire is for the purpose of performing rites;
rites, again, have been laid down as to be performed by one only when he
is associated with his wife, and not alone by himself. It is true that
some *Gṛhya* -writers have asserted that one should perform *śrāddhas*.
after having kindled the *Parameṣṭhiprāṇa* Fire; but this also pertains
to the man as associated with his wife; and this same also would be the
time for his ‘succession’ also. Nor is the performance of *śrāddhas*
impossible for one who has not set up the Fire; as it has been
prescribed even for one who has not even been ‘initiated’, in whose case
the use of the ‘*sradhā*’ alone has been excepted; and yet there is no
setting up of the. fire for him; as it is only one who is ‘learned’ (in
the Veda) that is entitled to it, and he is still without that learning
(before Initiation). As for the performance of the *Śrāddha* (though
this also presupposes knowledge of Vedic mantras), yet it has to be done
by the uninitiated boy to the best of his ablity, in obedience to a
direct injunction; this case being analogous to the performing of a
sacrifice by the Niṣāda (Śūdra) in accordance with a direct injunction.
Iu the event, however, of fire having been set up by his uncle or other
relations, in view of a ‘learned’ performer being available, the
uninitiated (and hence unlearned) boy is not entitled to the performance
of *śrāddhas*. If the setting up of fire be found to be prescribed in
the same context as *śrāddhas*, then one could set up the tire as an
accessory to the *śrādd* *ha*, after the completion of which it would he
abandoned.

Some people have quoted the *Smṛti*—“ The *Vaiśvadêva Homa* may be
offered in the ordinary fire also.” Others, again, hold that it is to to
performed by means of dry (uncooked) grains.—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Adhyāpanam*’—Nandana reads ‘*adhyāyanam*’ and explains that it is the
same as ‘*adhayanam*.’

Burnell declares that what makes India ‘the land of vermin’ is this
habit of the Hindus of offering food to all living beings!—To what
lengths will the detractor of a religion not go!

This is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 392);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
533);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 305), which adds that ‘*adhyāpana*’ stands
for ‘*adhyayana*’ ‘study,’ and ‘*tarpaṇa*’ for ‘*Śrāddha*’;—in
*Vidhānapārijāta* ‘(II p. 306), which adds (like Medhātithi) that
‘*adhyāpana*’ includes ‘study’ also; and ‘*tarpaṇa*’ stands for the
daily *Śrāddha* offering;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 918), which
adds that this is only an enumeration of the rites and not an injunction
of the order in which they are to be performed,—some people hold that
the four ‘sacrifices’ here mentioned go under the name of
‘*Vaiśvadeva*,’ but according to *Mādhava*, that name applies to only
three—the Devayajña, the Pitṛyajña and the Bhūtayajña.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (5.3,4,9).—‘He should be the worshipper of Gods, Pitṛs, Men,
Sages and Elementals; he should study the Veda every day; sacrifice to
Gods, sacrifice to Pitṛs, and sacrifice, to Men; and also Vedic Study.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6. 1-6).—‘These are the Five Great Sacrifices, these
also are the Great Sacrificial Sessions: Sacrifice to Gods, Sacrifice to
Pitṛs, Sacrifice to Elementals, Sacrifice to Men, Sacrifice to the Veda;
day after day, he shall offer Svāhā, ending with the supplying of
fuel,—in this manner does he accomplish the sacrifice to gods; day after
day, he shall offer Svadhā, ending with the water-offering,—in this
manner he accomplishes the sacrifice to Pitṛs; day after day, he shall
how down to the Elementals, ending with the offering of flowers,—in this
manner he accomplishes the Sacrifice to the Elements; day after day, he
shall offer food to Brāhmaṇas, ending with the offering of roots, fruits
and vegetables,—in this manner he accomplishes the Sacrifice of Men; day
after day he shall carry on Vedic Study, ending with the Praṇava,—in
this manner he accomplishes the sacrifice to the Veda.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 388).—‘He shall honour the Gods, the
Pitṛs and the Sages, respectively with the Kavya, the Kavya and the
Svādhyāya; *Havya* standing for what is offered into the Fire, with
*Svāhā*, which appeases the Gods,—*Svadhā* being what is offered to the
Pitṛs, which pleases the Pitṛs,—*Svādhyāya* being the reading that
starts with *om*, which sacrifices to the sages.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.20-25).—‘For the expiation of the sins, he shall perform the
Sacrifices to the Veda, the Gods, the Pitṛs, the Elementals and the Men;
Vedic Study constitutes the *Sacrifice to the Veda*;—Homa is the
*Sacrifice to the Gods*;—Water-libations to forefathers is the
*Sacrifice to the Pitṛs*;—the making of Bali-offerings constitute the
*Sacrifice to the Elementals*;—the honouring of guests constitutes the
*Sacrifice to Men*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.102).—‘Bali, Svadhā, Homa, Svādhyāya and Atithī-satkāra
are the great sacrifices to Elementals, Pitṛs, Gods, Veda and Men.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (3.1-2).—‘Now follow the Five Great
Sacrifices:—Sacrifice to Gods, Sacrifice to Elementals, Sacrifice to
Veda, Sacrifice to Pitṛs and Sacrifice to Men; the offerings made into
the Fire constitute the *Sacrifice to Gods*, the *bali-offerings*
constitute the *Sacrifice to Elementals*; the offerings made to Pitṛs
constitutes the *Sacrifice to Pitṛs*; the studying of the Veda
constitutes the *Sacrifice to Veda*; the offerings to Men constitute the
*Sacrifice to Men*.’

*Chandogapariśiṣṭa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 390).—‘The *Great
Sacrifices* should be understood to be those sacrifices that are offered
to Gods, Elementals, Pitṛs, Vedas and Men, in due order; the teaching of
Veda is the *Sacrifice to Vedas*, the water-offerings to forefathers is
the *Sacrifice to Pitṛs*, the offering of Homa is the *Sacrifice to
Gods*, the offering of *Bali* is the Sacrifice to Elementals, the
honouring of Guests is the *Sacrifice to Men*; or the *Sacrifice to
Pitṛs* may consist of *Śrāddha* or of offerings made to forefathers.’

*Śātātapa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 391).—‘He shall perform, in due
order, the Sacrifice to Elementals, the daily Śrāddha and the honouring
of guests, as also Vedic Study.’

*Jābāla* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 393).—‘Of the Great Sacrifices, the
first is accomplished by the water-libation; the Sacrifice to Gods is
accomplished by making offerings into Fire with the Sāvitrī-mantra, and
the Sacrifice to Elementals, by the Bali-offering; the Sacrifice to
Veda, by repeating Vedic texts; and the Sacrifice to Men, by the
honouring of guests.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

070	Teaching (and studying) is the sacrifice (offered) to Brahman, the (offerings of water and food called) Tarpana the sacrifice to the manes, the burnt oblation the sacrifice offered to the gods, the Bali offering that offered to the Bhutas, and the hospitable reception of guests the offering to men.
</details>
