+++
title = "072 देवतातिथि-भृत्यानाम् पितॄणाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who does not make offerings to the five—viz., gods, guests, dependents, Pitṛs and himself,—does not live, even though breathing.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अननुष्ठाननिन्दया प्रकृतविधिस्तुतिः । केचिच् चतुर्थ्या पठन्ति-

- देवतातिथिभृत्येभ्यः पितृभ्यश् चात्मने तथा । 

- न निर्वपति पञ्चभ्यः ॥ इति । 

निर्वापो ह्य् अत्र दानम्, न तादर्थ्योपकल्पनमात्रम् । तत्संबन्धेन प्रधानत्वाच् चतुर्थी युक्ता । एतेभ्यो यः प्रत्यहं न ददात्य् **उच्छ्वसन्न्** अपि प्राणन्न् अपि श्वासप्रश्वासवान् अपि **न जीवति** मृत एव, जीवितफलाभावात् । भृत्याश् चात्र "वृद्धौ तु मातापितरौ" (म्ध् ११.५ अद्देद् वेर्से) इति श्लोकनिर्दिष्टा वेदितव्याः, न दासाः, कर्मनिमित्तत्वात् तेभ्यो दानस्य । अथ वा गर्भदासादयो वार्द्धके कर्मस्व् अशक्ता अपि नियमतो लक्ष्यन्ते । भरणं जीर्णगवादीनाम् अवश्यम् इति विभागे वक्ष्यामः । उक्तं च गौतमेन "भर्तव्यस् तेन क्षीणवृत्तिः" (ग्ध् ६१) । देवताभ्यश् च निर्वापो ऽग्नौ होमः, स्थण्डिले च बलिहरणं तु वैश्वदेवेभ्यो दर्शपूर्णमासदेवताभ्य इति वा[^१३३] "अग्नये त्वा जुष्टं निर्वपामि" इति संबन्धाद् अन्यः को वास्ति निर्वापः । अतो देवताग्रहणेन गृहीतत्वाद् भूतानां[^१३४] पृथग् उपादानम् । आत्मग्रहणं दृष्टान्तः । यथात्मनो भोजनेन विना नास्ति जीवितं तदर्थम् अन्नोपयोगो ऽवश्यंभावी जीवितस्येष्टविषयत्वात् "सर्वत एवात्मानं गोपायेत्" (ग्ध् ९.३४) इति विधेश् च, एवं देवतादिभ्यो ऽपीति ॥ ३.६२ ॥


[^१३४]:
     M G 1st ed.: bhṛtyānāṃ


[^१३३]:
     M G: ca vā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse praises the original injunction by deprecating its omission.
Some people read this verse with the Dative
ending—‘*devatātithibhṛtyebhyaḥ pitṛbhyaścātmane tathā na nirvapati
panchabhyaḥ*.’

‘Offering’ here stands for actual *giving away*, not merely
*assignment*; hence, the Dative should be the right form.

He who does not make gifts to these,—even though he may be
‘*breathing*,’—carrying on the function of inhaling and exhaling
air,—‘*does not live*;’ *i.e*., is as good as dead, his living being
absolutely fruitless.

The term ‘*dependents*’ here should be taken as standing for ‘old
parents’ and others mentioned below (in 11.10); it does not stand for
*servants*; as gifts to these latter are made in return for services
rendered. Or, it may be taken as indicating such born slaves as become
incapable of rendering further service, on account of old age. We shall
also explain later on that it is necessary to feed old bulls, etc.
Gautama also has declared that ‘decrepit people, and those devoid of
livelihood, should be supported by him’ (10. 61).

The ‘offering’ to the gods consists of (*a*) pouring libations into
fire, (*b*) throwing ‘bali’-offerings on prepared altars; for what other
‘offering’ could there be, except these?—which is what is found in other
cases also;—*e.g*., those of the offerings made to the Viśvedevas and
other deities of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifices, where the offerings
are made with such *mantras* as ‘*Agnaye tvā juṣṭam nirvapāmi*;’ where
also mere relationship (with the gods) is what is meant. It is for this
reason that the ‘elementals’ (to whom the *bali-* offerings are made)
become included under ‘gods,’ and hence not mentioned separately.

‘*Himself*’ has been added by way of illustration; the sense being—“just
as, without eating, one’s own living is not possible, and for that
purpose the use of food is absolutely necessary, in view of one’s life
being a very desirable thing,—specially according to the direct
injunction that ‘one should guard oneself against all things’—so also is
the feeding of gods and the rest absolutely essential.”—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Bhṛtya*’ stands for ‘aged parents and others’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja
and Kullūka),—or ‘born slaves and others too old to work for them
living,’ also aged cattle &c., which is the alternative explanation,
suggested by Medhātithi, and not only ‘animals unfit for work,’ as noted
by Buhler. Nārāyaṇa, and Nandana read ‘*bhūtānām*’ and explain it as
‘goblins or living beings.’

This verse is quoted in *Viramītrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 392), which reads
‘*bhūtānām*’ for ‘*pāñcānām*’;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 146), in support of
the view that there is nothing wrong in doing the cooking for one’s own
self along with the gods and *Pitṛs*; it is only when one cooks for
himself alone that it is wrong.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.71-72)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.71].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

072	But he who does not feed these five, the gods, his guests, those whom he is bound to maintain, the manes, and himself, lives not, though he breathes.
</details>
