+++
title = "078 यस्मात् त्रयो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Because men in all the three states are sustained by householders only, with knowledge and food, therefore the householder’s is the highest state.—(78)

samo bhūteṣu hiṃsānugrahayoḥ | anārambhī |
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यस्मात् त्रयो ऽप्य् आश्रमिणो ज्ञानेन** वेदार्थव्याख्यानजन्येन **अन्नेन** च **धार्यन्त** उपक्रियन्ते[^१३८] **गृहस्थेन तस्माज् ज्येष्ठः** श्रेष्ठ **आश्रमो गृहम्** । गृहीति पाठे बहुव्रीहिः, गृहम् इति पाठे विशेषणसमासो ज्येष्ठाश्रम इति । अत्रापि गृहस्थैर् एवेत्य् औचित्यानुवादः, न वानप्रस्थादीनाम् अध्यापनादिप्रतिषेधः । वानप्रस्थस्य तावद् विहितम् एतत् "एतान्[^१३९] एव महायज्ञान् निर्वपेत्" (म्ध् ६.५) इति । प्रव्रजितस्य यद्य् अपि "समो भूतेषु हिंसानुग्रहयोः अनारम्भी" (ग्ध् ३.२४–२५) इत्य् अनुग्रहः प्रतिषिद्धस् तथापि वेदार्थव्याख्यानं भिक्षुशात्रे विहितम् । ज्ञानवैराग्यभावनाभ्यासातिशयविधानाच् च तयोर् नातिप्रयत्नो वेदार्थव्याख्याने । ब्रह्मचारिणस् स्वार्थलोपान्[^१४०] नाध्यापकत्वम्, भैक्षवृत्त्युपदेशाच् च कुतो ऽन्नदानम् । अतो गृहस्थानाम् एव प्रायेण तत्संभवाद् एवम् उक्तं गृहस्थैर् एव ॥ ३.६८ ॥


[^१४०]:
     M G: tvārthalopān


[^१३९]:
     M G 1st ed.: tān


[^१३८]:
     M G: upari kriyante
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Because men in all the three states are sustained*’—*i.e.,
helped*—‘*with knowledge*’—*i.e*., knowledge brought about by the
expounding of the meaning of the Veda—‘*and food*,’ by the
Householder,—therefore, ‘*the Householder’s state is the highest*’—best.

If we read ‘*gṛhī*’ for ‘*gṛham*,’ the compound ‘*jyeṣṭhāśramaḥ*’ should
be expounded as a *Bahuvrīhi*; while with reading ‘*gṛham*’ it is
*Karmadhāraya*.

Here also the specification ‘*by Householders only*’ serves only to
re-iterate what is right and proper, and it does not mean that persons
in the state of the Recluse and others are not to do the work of
teaching. In fact, for the Recluse the work of teaching has been
specially enjoined in the verse—‘he should perforin these great
sacrifices, etc.’ (below, 6. 5). As for the Renunciate, it is true that
the according of any help to anybody has been prohibited by the rule—‘he
should take no part in injuring or helping’ (*Gautama* 3. 24-25); but
the expounding of the meaning of the Veda has been actually enjoined
among the duties of the Mendicant. Further, for the Recluse and the
Renunciate, much effort would not be needed in the expounding of the
Veda, as they are required to cultivate a high degree of knowledge,
dispassion, thought-power and practice. As for the Religious Student,
the work of teaching would interfere with his own proper work (of
study); and as for the gift of food, how could this be possible for him,
when he himself has been advised to live on alms?

Thus, since it is for the Housholder alone that the two are generally
possible, the text has used the phrase ‘*by Householders only*.’— (78)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 223, l.15) ‘*Hiṃsānugrahayoḥ*’—This refers to Gautama
3.24-25, where we read—

> samo bhūteṣu hiṃsānugrahayoḥ \| anārambhī \|

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 457).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Dakṣa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 456).—‘Because gods, men and animals
are supported by the householder, therefore is the householder the best
of all. The householder has been described as the source of the other
three stages; whenever he suffers, the other three suffer with
him;...... for this reason, the householder is to be guarded with due
effort, and should be honoured and worshipped by the king, as also by
the other three.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 457).—‘In as much as it is from the householder
that proceed the birth, growth and maintenance of all the
life-stages,—he has been declared to be superior.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (8.14.16).—‘It is the householder alone who offers
sacrifices; it is he alone who performs austerities; among all the
life-stages, that of the householder is the best; just as all rivers and
rivulets find their final rest in the ocean, so do persons in the
various stages of life find their haven in the householder; just as all
living beings keep alive under the protection of their mother, so do
they also live under the protection of the householder.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.27.29).—‘The religious student, the renunciate and the
recluse, all these derive their living from the householders......... It
is the householder alone who performs sacrifices; he alone performs
austerities; he alone makes gifts; hence is the householder the highest
of all. Sages, Pitṛs and Gods (,?) Elementals and Guests have
expectations from householders; hence alone is the householder the
highest of all.’

*Gautama* (3.1).—‘Of these, the householder is the source; the others
being unproductive.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6.29).—‘The teachers have held to a single life-stage;
the others being unproductive.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

078	Because men of the three (other) orders are daily supported by the householder with (gifts of) sacred knowledge and food, therefore (the order of) householders is the most excellent order.
</details>
