+++
title = "079 स सन्धार्यः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That state, which cannot be maintained by men with weak organs, should be kept up with care by one desiring imperishable heaven and also undying happiness in this world.—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१४१]:
     M G: cehecchatā nityaṃ

**स** गृहाश्रमः । **प्रयत्नेन संधार्यो** ऽनुष्ठेयो ऽक्षयस्वर्गकामेन्**एह** **च सुखम् इच्छता** । **अत्यन्तं** यस्य सुखस्यान्तो नास्ति[^१४२] । **अत्यन्त**शब्दो नित्यतां गमयति । **य** आश्रमो **ऽधार्यो** ऽशक्यो[^१४३] धारयितुं **दुर्बलेन्द्रियैः** । 


[^१४३]:
     M G 1st ed.: 'śakyaṃ


[^१४२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: atyantaṃ yasya sukhasyānto nāsti

- एतद् उक्तं भवति । यतः स्त्रीसंभोगसुसंस्कृतभोजनादि गृहस्थस्यावश्यंभावि ततश् चेन्द्रियाणां विषयसक्तौ दोषः, अत उच्यते-[^१४४] प्रयत्नेन आश्रमान्तरेभ्यो धारयितव्यः । अत्रापि महान् इन्द्रियसंयमः । अनृतौ न गन्तव्यम्, परदारा न गन्तव्याः, शेषान्नं भोक्तव्यम् । विषयसंनिधाने यो नियमः स दुष्करः । 


[^१४४]:
     M G 1st ed.: doṣeṇa kim ucyate

- **स्वर्गम् अक्षयम्** इति । नानेन सर्वेषां गृहस्थकर्मणां स्वर्गफलतोच्यते, केषांचिन् नित्यत्वात् केषांचित् फलान्तरश्रवणात् । ये ऽप्य् अश्रुतफलाः स्वर्गफलतया कल्प्यन्ते तेषाम् अपि केवलानाम् अनुवादे न कश्चिद् विशेषणे हेतुः । तस्माद् विहिताभिप्रेतफलानुवादो ऽयम् । न चाधिकारान्तरम् इदम् । तेषाम् एव यावज्जीविकं स्वर्गकामस्येति च शक्यं वक्तुम् । **सुखं चेहेच्छता** इत्यविधेयेन तुल्यत्वावगमात् । न हीह सुखकामेनेत्य् एतच्[^१४५] छक्यं कर्मफलतया ज्ञातुम्, विशेषस्यानिर्देशात् । सर्वा हि प्रीतिर् ग्रामपुत्रादिलाभैर् विशेषैर् अवच्छिन्ना प्रतीयते । अनवच्छेदेन प्रीतिमात्रं चेत् स्वर्ग एव । न च तस्यैहिकत्वम् । तस्माद् दृष्टसुखाप्तिकामानुवादो ऽयम् । अनिकेता ह्य् अन्य आश्रमिणो वृक्षमूलनिकेतनाः परगृहवासिनो दुःखम् आसते । तस्माद् अयं तावद् अनुवादः ॥ ३.६९ ॥


[^१४५]:
     M G: sukhakāmenetarac

_तत्तुल्यतयायम् अप्य् अनुवाद एव ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*That state*’—*i.e*., the Householder’s.

‘*Should be kept up with care*’— should be maintained by one who desires
Heaven and one who is desirous of obtaining happiness in this world.

‘*Atyantam*,’ meaning ‘that of which there is no end,’ implies
*permanence*.

‘This state, *which cannot be maintained by men with weak organs*.’

The sense is as follows:—For the Householder, intercourse with women,
eating of rich food and such other luxuries are inevitable; but if one
were to become unduly addicted to such sensuous objects, one would be
incurring sin; hence it is said that ‘this has to be kept with greater
care than the other states;’ specially as in the Householder’s state
great restraint of the organs is called for; such for instance, as one
should not have intercourse with one’s wife, except during ‘season,’ he
should not have recourse to other people’s wives, he should eat only
such food as has been left (after the offering to the gods and the
feeding of guests). And Restraint, when the objects of enjoyment are
within reach, is extremely difficult.

‘*Imperishable heaven*;’—by this it is not meant that the attainment of
Heaven is the result of performing all the duties of the Householder;
because, as a matter of fact, among the duties of the Householder some
are compulsory (and as such not leading to any results), and for others
other rewards have been mentioned. It is true that those acts in
connection with which no rewards are mentioned are assumed to have their
reward in the attainment of Heaven; but in the present context these
duties only form subjects of *reference*; and hence, there would be no
point in the specifying of any rewards in connection with them. Hence
the phrase in question has to be taken merely as a reference to such
*desirable results* as follow from the prescribed acts. Nor can the
present text be taken as stating the desire for a definite result as
constituting the occasion for the performance of certain fresh duties;
because the same duties that have been prescribed as necessary
throughout life might very well be spoken of as to be performed by one
who is desirous of obtaining Heaven; specially as the mention of Heaven
is clearly found to be on the same footing as ‘desiring happiness in
this world,’ which is a reward that can have no connection with anything
that is enjoined; for ‘happiness in this world’ can never be recognised
as the reward of any religious act, specially as no particular form of
happiness is specified; we do not find the happiness in any way
specified as that proceeding from the acquisition of landed property, or
of a son, and so forth. And if the happiness is not specified, it means
the same thing as ‘Heaven.’ But Heaven cannot be said to beloug to ‘this
world.’ Hence this phrase should be taken as referring to the
experiencing of perceptible (physical) pleasures. Men in the other
‘states’ are without homes, living either under trees or in the house of
other people; and as such they live uncomfortably. Hence the phrase
‘desiring happiness’ has to be taken as a mere reiterative reference.
And, consequently, the former phrase, ‘desiring Heaven,’ also, standing
on the same footing, has to be taken as a re-iterative reference.—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Durbalendriyaiḥ*’—‘Of uncontrolled organs’ (Govindarāja and Kullūka;
*not* Medhātithi, to whom this explanation is wrongly attributed by
Buhler and Burnell).
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

079	(The duties of) this order, which cannot be practised by men with weak organs, must be carefully observed by him who desires imperishable (bliss in) heaven, and constant happiness in this (life).
</details>
