+++
title = "083 एकम् अप्य्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At that (Śrāddha) which forms part of the Five Sacrifices, one should feed even one Brāhmaṇa in honour of the pitṛs; and on this occasion he shall not feed any Brāhmaṇa in honour of the Viśve-devas.—(83)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

श्राद्धशब्देन विधानात् सर्वस्मिंस् तद्विधाने प्राप्ते कश्चिद् इतिकर्तव्यताभागो निवर्त्यते **न चैवात्राशयेत् किंचित्** । नात्रान्वाहिके श्राद्धे वैश्वदेवं प्रति विश्वान् देवान् उद्दिश्य द्विजभोजनम् । 

- अत्र <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः । प्राप्ते भोजन **आशयेद्** इति पुनर्वचनम् अपूर्वत्वम् अस्य दर्शयति । तेनैतावद् एवैतच् छ्राद्धं यत् पितॄन् उद्धिश्य ब्राह्मण एको भोज्यते, न त्व् अन्या काचिद् अर्घपात्रादिहोमाद्येतिकर्तव्यतास्ति । ब्रह्मचर्यं स्वाध्यायनिषेध इत्य् एवमादि न भवति । 

- **एकम् अप्य् आशयेद् विप्रम्** । त्रयाणां नियमाद् एकैकम् उभयत्रेत्य् अस्याविधित्वाद् अप्राप्त एको विधीयते । एकम् अपि भोजयेत्, सति संभवे बहून् अपि । **पित्रर्थं** पितृतृप्त्यर्थम् । **पाञ्चयज्ञिकम्** । पञ्चयज्ञभवं पाञ्चयज्ञिकं तदन्तर्गतम् । पाञ्चयज्ञिकशब्दः श्राद्धे प्रयुक्तः । न ह्य् एतत् पाञ्चयज्ञिकं तर्पणम् । तेन तर्पणभोजनयोः समुच्चयः । अस्य तु विकल्पो भविष्यति "यद् एव तर्पयत्य् अद्भिः" (म्ध् ३.२७३) इति ॥ ३.७३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Since the offering to the Viśvedevas has been enjoined under the name
‘*Śrāddha*,’ it would follow that the entire procedure of the Śrāddha
has to be gone through at that offering also; hence the present verse
proceeds to preclude a certain portion of that procedure. ‘*On this
occasion*’—of the daily *Śrāddha—one* should not feed any Brāhmaṇas in
honour of the *Viśvedevas*,—*i.e*., with reference to these.

On this point, some people make the following observations:—“Since
feeding is already understood as forming part of the Śrāddha, the
presence of the verb ‘should feed’ in this verse indicates that this
feeding is something new (different from the feeding that forms an
integral part of all *Śrāddhas*.) Hence the *Śrāddha* that is laid down
in the present verse is to be regarded as consisting merely in the act
of feeding one Brāhmaṇa, and there is nothing else to be done at it, in
the shape of the offering of a vessel of water, oblations, and so forth;
nor are the restraints relating to ‘avoidance of sexual intercourse,’
‘omitting of Vedic Study,’ and so forth to be observed in this
connection.”

‘*Should feed even one Brāhmaṇa*’—the number of Brāhmaṇas to be fed
having been fixed at *three*,—and what is said (under 3.125) regarding
the feeding of ‘one at each of the two’ not being of.the nature of an
Injunction—the number ‘one,’ which has not been indicated by any other
authority, is what is distinctly enjoined here;—the sense being that
‘one should feed even one Brāhmaṇa,—but also many, if possible.’

‘*In honour of the pitṛs*’—*i.e*., for the purpose of satisfying the
pitṛs.

‘*That which forms part of the Five Sacrifices*’—*i.e*., that which is
included among the Five Sacrifices; this term being used here in the
sense of ‘*Śrāddha*;’ what is spoken of as ‘what forms part of the Five
Sacrifices’ is not the *Tarpaṇa*—offering (of water); but the
combination of this *water—offering* and the *feeding* of the Brāhmaṇa.
The optional alternative to this shall be described below, under
3.283.—(83)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 432), where the
following notes are added:—‘*Pāñcayajñike*’ means ‘at that *Pitṛyajña*
which forms part of the Five Great Sarifices;’—the particle ‘*api*’
implies that, if possible, one should feed several Brāhmaṇas also;—the
second half of the verse means that ‘*Viśvedeva-Śrāddha*’ does not form
part of ‘*Nityaśrāddha*’, in support of which it quotes a text from
*Bhaviṣya Purāṇa*;—also in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1565).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (95.65.66).—‘May some such person be born in our family,
as would make to us offerings of water out of deep rivers, specially
those whose water is cool! May some excellent man be horn in our family
who, with mind composed, would offer Śrāddha to us at Gayā, under the
banyan tree!’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.104).—‘Daily should food and water he offered to Pitṛs
and Men; one should constantly carry on Vedic study; he shall not cook
food for himself alone.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.97.8).—(Reproduces Manu 82.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.2.4).—‘Or he may feed a single Brāhmaṇa fully learned in
the Veda, endowed with learning and character, and free from all evil
characteristics.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 430).—‘Having made the offering to
the Vedic Scholar, and to the Religious Student, he shall make it to the
Pitṛs, and then feed the guests.’

*Chandogapariśiṣṭa* (Do., p. 431)—‘For the fulfilment of the offering to
the Pitṛs, he may feed at least one Brāhmaṇa;...... if there is no one
present to he fed, or if there is not sufficient food left, he shall
take up as much food as there may be and offer it daily to Pitṛs and
Men.’

*Ādi-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘In honour of all the six Pitṛs, he may feed at
least one Brāhmaṇa every day.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya-purāṇa* (Do., p. 432).—‘Every day, one shall offer śrāddha,
either with food or with water; and in honour of the Pitṛs, he shall
feed several Brāhmaṇas, or a single one.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (Do.).—‘Every day one shall offer śrāddha to the
Pitṛs, either with food or with water.’

*Vyāsa* (Do., p. 433).—‘At the daily śrāddha, the Viśvedevas are to be
omitted.’

*Bhaviṣya-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘At the daily śrāddha, there is to he no
offering to the gods.’

*Puraṇa* (Do.).—‘That which is called the daily śrāddha is observed as
being devoid of the offering to the gods; it is offered to only six
ancestors, and there is to be no offering of balls or the sacrificial
fee.’

*Laghu-Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 145).—‘At the daily śrāddha, there is to he
no offering to the gods, also no water-offering or hall-offering.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 115).—‘The daily śrāddha I am going to
describe as without the water-offering or the invocation, and also
without the offering to gods.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparāka, p. 145).—‘For the accomplishment of the Pitṛyajña,
one shall feed at least one Brāhmaṇa, without making any offering to the
gods. If there is no Brāhmaṇa available, a small quantity of food should
be taken out and offered to Pitṛs and Men.’

*Pracetas* (Aparārka, p. 140).—‘The daily offering is not to be made
into fire; there is to he no invocation, nor dismissal.’

*Nārāyaṇa* (Aparārka, p. 146).—‘Having invited one or several śrotriyas,
making them sit facing the east......... he shall offer him water and
seat; and also water for washing, after he has eaten the food offered to
him to the best of one’s capacity.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

083	Let him feed even one Brahmana in honour of the manes at (the Sraddha), which belongs to the five great sacrifices; but let him not feed on that (occasion) any Brahmana on account of the Vaisvadeva offering.
</details>
