+++
title = "084 वैश्वदेवस्य सिद्धस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Out of the food cooked in the domestic fire, for the Viśvedevas, the Brāhmaṇa shall every day offer, according to rule, Homa to these deities,’—(84)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विश्वेदेवार्थो **वैश्वदेवः** पाक उच्यते । सर्वार्थो विश्वदेवशब्दो ऽपि संप्रदानमत्रोपलक्षणार्थः । तेनातिथ्याद्यर्थताप्य् उक्ता[^१५५] भवति । **सिद्धस्य होमम् आभ्यो** वक्ष्यमाणाभ्यो **देवताभ्यः कुर्यात्** । सिद्धशब्देन "देवतोद्देशेन देवस्य त्वेति मन्त्रवान् निर्वापो न कर्तव्यः" इति दर्शयति, केवलं सर्वार्थे निष्पन्नपाके[^१५६] होमादि कर्तव्यम् इति विध्यर्थः । **गृह्ये** । यथाविधिहोमादिकरणनिर्देशः[^१५७] । **विधिपूर्वकं** समाचारप्राप्तां परिसमूहनपर्युक्षणादिरुपाम् इतिकर्तव्यताम् आह । **ब्राह्मण**शब्दस् त्रैवर्णिकाधिकारप्रदर्शनार्थः[^१५८] । **अन्वहं** नित्यम् इत्य् अर्थः । **देवता**ग्रहणं स्वाहाकारप्राप्त्यर्थम् । षष्ठीनिर्देशाद् अग्नेर् इदम् इति प्रयोगः स्यात् । देवताशब्देन तु स्वाहाकारेण वा देवेभ्यो हविः संप्रदीयत इति । याज्यान्ते पुनर् वषट्कारस्य विधानात्, स्मार्तहोमे त्व् अभावः । स्वाहाकारस् तु सर्वत्र । तस्मिंश् च सति "अग्नये स्वाहा" इति प्रयोगः ॥ ३.७४ ॥


[^१५८]:
     M G: - kārāt pradarśanārthaḥ


[^१५७]:
     M G 1st ed.L vā vidhihomādi-


[^१५६]:
     M G: sarvārthaniṣpannapākena (G 2nd ed.: sarvārthe)


[^१५५]:
     M G: -arthatāyuktā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Vaiśvadeva*,’ ‘*for the Viśvedevas*’—*i.e*., what is cooked for the
sake of the Viśvedevas. Though the term ‘*viśvedeva*’ literally means
‘all deities,’ yet here it is indicative of only those to whom oblations
are offered. Hence the term may be taken as standing also for what is
cooked for guests and others.

‘*Out of the food cooked, Homa should be offered to these deities*’— to
those going to be mentioned in the next verse. The term ‘*cooked*’
implies that the offering is made out of what has been already cooked
for all recipients, and that there is no special cooking for the deities
only, done with the *mantra ‘Devasya tvā savituḥ, etc*.’

‘*According to rule*’—this means that the Homa is to be offered in
accordance with rules laid down in the *Gṛhyasūtras*; by which all such
details of procedure become included as sweeping the spot, sprinkling
water over it, and so forth.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ is for the purpose of indicating the fact of the
three higher castes being entitled to the performance.

‘*Every day*’— daily.

‘*Deities*’ (in the Dative) serves to indicate the necessity of using
the syllable ‘*svāhā*,’ If the genitive bad been used, then the words
need (at the offering) would have been ‘*agneḥ idam*’ (not ‘*agnaye
svāhā*). The use of the term ‘*devatā*’ (‘Deity’), however, makes the
rule mean that ‘all offerings to the gods should be made with’ the
syllable *svāhā*.’ As for the syllable ‘*vaṣaṭ*,’ it is to be pronounced
at the end of the ‘*Yājyā*’ *mantras*, but never at a *Smārta Homa*;
while the syllable ‘*svāhā*’ is to be pronounced at all *Homas*; such
being the case, the formula used should be ‘*agnaye svāhā*.’—(84)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 402).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.84-93)  
**

*Āpastamba- Dharmasūtra* (2.3.12).—‘For the householder, the oblations
of food and the Bali-offerings are conducive to Heaven and to
prosperity.’

*Viṣṇu Smṛti* (67.4).—‘Then with the remnant of the food, he shall make
the Bali-offerings; over the east, to Agni..... on the pillar to Śrī, to
Hiraṇyakeśī and to the Trees; at the door-way, to Dharma and Adharma and
to Death; to Varuṇa, near the water-pot; to Viṣṇu, on the mortar; to the
Maruts, on the stone-slab; at the adjoining room, to King Vaiśravaṇa and
to the elementals; over the eastern half, to Indra and to Indrapuruṣas;
over the southern half, to Yama and to Yamapuruṣas; over the western
half, to Varuṇa and to Varuṇapuruṣas; over the northern half, to Soma
and to Somapuruṣas; over the centre, to Brahman and to Brahmapuruṣas;
upwards, to Ākāśa; over the altar, to the diurnal elementals; and in the
evening, to the nocturnal elementals. For crows, dogs and Caṇḍālas, the
food shall he offered on the ground.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.2.1, 2).—‘Morning and evening, he shall offer
oblations of cooked food; to the deities of the Agnihotra, to Soma, to
Vanaspati, to Agni-Soma, to Indra-Agni, to Dyauḥ-Pṛthivī, to
Dhanvantari, to Indra, to Viśvedevas, and to Brahman.’

*Pāraskara* (2.9.1.12).—‘Out of the food dedicated to the Viśvedevas, he
shall offer oblations with *svāhā* to Brahman, to Prajāpati, to the
Gṛhyās, to Kaśyapa, to Anumati, to Bhūtagṛhas, to Parjanya, to Apas, to
Pṛthivī to Dhātṛ, to Vidhātṛ; to Vāyu and to the Quarters, towards each
quarter; three oblations in the centre to Brahman, to Antarikṣa and to
Sūrya; to the north of these, to all-gods and all-elementals; to Uṣas
and to the Lord of the elementals; on the South, to the Pitṛs; and at
the end he should offer to the Brāhmaṇas; and it should he distributed
in the right proportion, among beggars and guests.’

*Gautama* (5.11-16).—‘Homa-oblations should he offered into the fire, to
Agni, to Dhanvantari, to Viśvedevas, to Prajāpati and to Sviṣṭakṛt; to
the presiding deity of each of the quarters, towards each quarter; on
the doorway, to the Maruts; entering the room, to the household deities:
over the centre, to Brahman; on the water-jar, to Apas; in the sky, to
Ākāśa; in the evening, to the night-walkers.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.3.17-23; and 2.4.1-8).—‘In the making of the
Bali-offerings, each spot should he swept and washed with water; and on
each one of these spots food should he served;...... at the bedstead
with the Kāma-mantra; at the door-step, with the
Antarikṣa-mantra;......... towards the south, with the Pitṛ-mantra;
towards the north, to Rudra; the last one in the evening towards the
sky.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.9.5.6).—‘he shall make all beings—down to
dogs and Caṇḍālas—partakers in the Vaiśvadeva offering; but according to
some, it shall not be offered to the undeserving.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.4).—‘Having offered his share to the learned guest, or to
the religious student, he shall make the offering to the Pitṛs.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.2.3-10).—‘Next the Bali-offerings; to the
gods, to Apas, to the Herbs, to Trees, to the Household, to the
Household Deities, and to the Vāstudevas; to Indra and to Indrapuruṣas,
to Yama and to Yamapuruṣas, to Varuṇa and to Varuṇapuruṣas, to Soma and
to Somapuruṣas,—these towards each of the quarters; in the centre, to
Brahman and to Brahmapuruṣas; to the Viśvedevas; during the day, to all
the day-walkers; and in the evening, to the night-walkers and towards
the north, to the Rakṣas.’

*Gobhila* (1.4.8-12).—‘The first offering that he makes is the offering
to Pṛthivī; the second is the offering to Vāyu, the third is the
offering to the Viśvedevas, and the fourth is the offering to Prajāpati.
Then follow the other Bali-offerings; the first to the water-deity, made
on the water-jar, the centre and the door-way; the second to Herbs and
Trees; and the third to Ākāśa. Then comes another offering: over the
bedstead, either to Kāma or to Manyu; then to the Rakṣojanas. The
remnant of all these offerings is deposited towards the South, and it
goes to the Pitṛs.’

*Yajñavalkya* (1.103).—‘Out of the food left after the offerings to
gods, ho shall make the offering to elementals; and he shall deposit
food on the ground, for dogs, Caṇḍālas and crows.’

*Kurma-purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 312).—‘For dogs, Caṇḍālas and
outcasts, as also for birds, one shall offer food outside, on the
ground.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

084	A Brahmana shall offer according to the rule (of his Grihya-sutra a portion) of the cooked food destined for the Vaisvadeva in the sacred domestic fire to the following deities:
</details>
