+++
title = "091 पृष्ठवास्तुनि कुर्वीत"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

These offerings one should make in the upper dwelling, for the purpose of acquiring all kinds of food. The entire remnant of the offerings he should offer towards the South, to the pitṛs.—(91)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वयोर् आहुत्योः शेषो ऽयम् । आधारविधानार्थम् आद्यो ऽर्धश्लोकः[^१६६] । आवासकस्योपरि य आवासस् तत् **पृष्ठवास्तु** । एकशालाया अप्य् उपरिभागः । तत्र **बलिं कुर्वीत** दिवाचारिभ्यो नक्तंचारिभ्यश् च । **सर्वान्नभूतये** । तादर्थ्ये चतुर्थी, न संप्रदाने । होमाद्यश्रुतत्वाद् बलिशब्दस्य पूर्वशेषत्वाद् आधारापेक्षत्वाच् च पूर्वयोर् आहुत्योः । न क्वचिद् अपि वैश्वदेवे "सर्वान्नभूतिर्" देवतात्वेन स्मृत्यन्तरे श्रुता । तस्माद् अयम् अस्यार्थः । सर्वेषाम् अन्नानां कॢप्त्यर्थम् एतच् च कर्तव्यम्, एतस्मिन् बलिहरणे कृते सर्वाण्य् अन्नानि भवन्ति । अवयवप्रसिद्ध्या त्व् अर्थावगम उपपद्यमाने समुदायार्थकल्पनम् उक्तम् । देवतापेक्षया वा ऽदृष्टः कश्चिद् अर्थः कल्पयितव्यः । **बलिशेषं** । शेषग्रहणात् पात्रे समुद्धृत्य ततो होमः कर्तव्यः, न तु स्थालीस्थाद् एव बलिदानानि ग्रहीतव्यानि । **दक्षिणतः** दक्षिणस्यां दिशि, तदभिमुख इति यावत् । **सर्वं** यावन् मात्रं गृहीतम्[^१६७] ॥ **३.८**१ ॥


[^१६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: mantragṛhītam; G 2nd ed.: mātraṃ (pātre) gṛhītam


[^१६६]:
     J: 'rdhaḥ ślokaḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is said here is supplementary to the two offerings spoken of in the
latter half of the foregoing verse; and the first, half of this verse
prescribes the receptacle for those two offerings.

The dwelling on the top of another dwelling is called the ‘*upper
dwelling*.’ In the case of a single-storied house, it means the *roof*.
There one should make the offering to the ‘roamers at night’ and
‘roamers during the day.’

‘*Sarvānnabhūtaye*’—‘*for the purpose* *of* *acquiring all kinds* *of
food*’;—the Dative ending has the sense of ‘for the purpose of,’ ‘with a
view to,’ and not that of ‘recipient;’ for no oblations have been laid
down as to be offered to any such deity as *Sarvānnabhūti*; specially,
as the term ‘offering’ in the present verse is supplementary to the
preceding verse, and the offerings prescribed in the preceding verse
require the mention of a receptacle for them. Even in other *Smṛtis* no
such deity as ‘*Sarvānnabhūti*’ has been mentioned in connection with
the ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ offerings. Hence, what the word means is that ‘the
act is to be done *for* *the purpose o* *f* *acquiring all kinds of
food*;’ *i.e*., ‘when this offering is made, all kinds of food are
obtained.’ And when the etymological signification of a word is found
compatible with the context, there can be no justification for assuming
a signification for the word as a whole (irrespectively of its
etymology.) So that, if the word (‘*Sarvānnabhūti*’) were to be taken as
signifying a deity, an absolutely unknown denotation will have to be
attributed to it.

‘*The remnant of the offerings*;’—tbe use of the term ‘remnant’ implies
that the offering material has to be collected in a vessel and then
offered, and that the oblations are not to be taken out of what is
contained in the cooking pot.

‘*Towards the South*’—*i.e*., in the southerly direction; *i.e*., the
man should face the south.

‘*Entire*’—*i.e*., all that has been taken out in the vessel.—(91)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pṛṣṭhavāstuni*’—‘On the upper storey, or on the roof of the house’
(Medhātithi);—‘behind the house’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa);—‘outside
the house’ (Nandana);—‘behind the offerer’s back’ (Kullūka).

‘*Sarvānnahhūtaye*’—‘The same deity occurs in Śāṅkhāyana, *Gṛhyasūtra*,
2.14, where Professor Oldenberg has *Sarvannabhūti*, while the
Petersburg Dictionary gives *Sarvānubhūti*”—Buhler.

Medhātithi denies that there is any such ‘deity’ and he is averse to
assuming any such unheard of deity, when the literal meaning of the term
is not incompatible with the text,—‘for the acquiring of all kinds of
food.’ Kullūka, however, who reads ‘*Sarvātmabhūtaye*’ takes it as the
name of a deity.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 403), where the
following explanations are added:—*Pṛṣṭhavāstuni*’ means ‘behind the
house, in the place where the urinal is situated’;—‘*Sarvānubhūti*’ is a
deity of that name;—‘*haret*’ means ‘should offer’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.84-93)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.84].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

091	In the upper story let him offer a Bali to Sarvatmabhuti; but let him throw what remains (from these offerings) in a southerly direction for the manes.
</details>
