+++
title = "094 कृत्वैतद् बलिकर्मैवम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having performed this rite of offerings, he should first feed his guest and then give alms in the proper form, to one who is mendicant and a ‘Brahmacārin’—(94)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिथिलक्षणं वक्ष्यति । तम् अभ्यागतं सन्तं **पूर्वम् आशयेद्** भोजयेत्, सर्वभोक्तृभ्यो गृहसंनिहितेभ्यः । **भिक्षां भिक्षवे च** याचमानाय दद्यात् । **भिक्षा**शब्देन स्वल्पपरिमाणम् अन्नदानम् उच्यते । उक्तं हि "प्रसृतिर् भिक्षा" । अन्तःपुरप्रसिद्धं चैतत् । **ब्रह्मचारिणे विधिवत्** । अन्यस्मा अपि पाखण्डादिरूपाय भिक्षवे न विधिवद् दातव्या । ब्रह्मचारिणे तु विधिवत् स्वस्तिवाचनपूर्वं भिक्षादानम् इत्य् एष विधिः ।

- <u>अथ वा</u> **भिक्षुः** परिव्राड्, **ब्रह्मचारी** प्रथमाश्रमी । चशब्दश् चास्थाने वृत्तानुरोधात् । **ब्रह्मचारिणे च** इति पठितव्यम् । एवं तु वानप्रस्थाय न दानं स्यात् । तस्माद् भिक्षते[^१७४] इति भिक्षुः, तस्यैव विशेषणं ब्रह्मचारिग्रहणम् । तेन त्रिभ्यो ऽप्य् आश्रमिभ्यो भिक्षादानं नियमतो ऽनुज्ञातं भवति । पाखण्डादीनां तु पतितादिवत् । सर्वग्रहणेन भिक्षोपकारो यथाशक्ति विहित एव ॥ ३.८४ ॥


[^१७४]:
     M G 1st ed: bhikṣa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The right definition of the ‘guest’ shall he given later on (in 102);
when such a guest has arrived, he shall feed him *first*,—*i.e*., before
all others that may be near the house and may be going to eat.

*Alms to one who is a mendicant*’—*i.e*., he should give it to a person
that asks for it. The term ‘*alms*’ stands for the gift of a small
quantity of food; it has been said that ‘it is a handful that
constitutes *alms*;’ and this is well known among housewives.

‘*In the proper form*,’ to ‘*a Brahmacārin*’—to others even to a beggar
that may be a disguised heretic, alms may be given,—but not in the
proper form; but to the Brahmacārin it should be given ‘*in the proper
form*;’ *i.e*., the giving is to be preceded by the syllable ‘*svasti*’
by the *recipient*; this is the ‘form’ referred to.

Or, the term ‘*bhikṣu*,’ ‘mendicant,’ in the text may be taken in the
sense of the *Parivrāṭ*, the Renunciate,—and the term ‘*brahmacārī*’ in
that of one who is still in the first stage of *Studentship*. The
particle ‘*ca*’ occurs in the wrong place on account of exigencies of
metre; it should occur after ‘*brahmacārine*.’

But under this explanation, no alms would ever be given to the Recluse
(the person in the third stage.) Hence the right view appears to be to
take the term ‘*bhikṣu*’ (mendicant) in the sense of ‘one who begs,’ and
the term ‘*brahmacārin*’ (*chaste*) as a qualification of the former.
And in this way the giving of alms to persons in all the three stages
becomes regularly sanctioned. As for heretics, they are to be treated
like outcasts (*vide* 92),—and the mention of ‘all’ (in 93) has already
enjoined the helping in the form of giving food, according to one’s
means, to all living beings.—(94)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Bhikṣave brahmacāriṇe*’—‘To the Religious Student who begs for it’
(Medhātithi and Govindarāja);—‘to the Remmciate *and* to the Religious
Student’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda; also suggested, but disapproved, by
Medātithi);—‘the chaste beggar’ (*third* suggestion by Medhātithi and
approved on the ground that it includes all the three,—the Student, the
Hermit and the Remmciate).

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p.
392) as laying down that the feeding of the guests is to be done after
the Bali-offerings; but adds that this is meant for those cases where
the *Śrāddha* is not performed, as in the case of the Householder who
has his father still living;—also on p. 434, where it explains that what
is meant by ‘*Pūrvamāśayet*’, ‘should feed *first*’, is that the feeding
should be done *before the Nityaśrāddha*, and applies to those cases
where the ‘guest’ happens to arrive at that exact time.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.3-5).—‘One shall make Bali-offerings to the Household
deities; hiving offered a share to the Vedic scholar or to toe religious
student, who may have arrived, he shall make the offering to the Pitṛs;
then he shall feed the guests, in order of seniority; and then the
members of his own household.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.108).—‘Alms should be given, with due honour, to the
recluse firm in his vow; and he shall feed only friends and relations as
might arrive at the time.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.14).—‘Alms shall be given to the recluse.’

*Pāraskara* (2.9.12).—‘Food shall be distributed among the recluses and
the guests, in due order.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.5.14).—‘The Praṇava, the Vyāhṛtis and the Sāvitrī
constitute the five Great Sacrifices, which purify the Brāhmaṇa day
after day; purified by these five Sacrifices, he makes offerings to the
gods.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6.5).—‘Day after day he shall offer to Brāhmaṇas food
containing also roots, fruits and vegetables; thereby he accomplishes
the Sacrifice to human beings.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.7.19).—‘First of all he shall feed the guests, then such
ladies of the house as may he carrying; and then, with special care, the
children, the old persons and those that may be ill.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.4.11).—‘He shall feed the guests first of
all.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika. pp. 429-430).—‘After having made
the Bali-offerings be shall stay in the court-yard, expecting guests,
till the cows are milked; when a guest has arrived, he shall welcome him
with due honour, regarding him as Hiraṇyagarbha; at least one other
Brāhmaṇa the Householder shall feed in honour of his father.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘He shall not ask the guest either his *gotra* or his
Vedic Rescension or the extent of his Vedic study.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘If a *Bhikṣuka*, seeker for alms, comes before the
offerings have been made to the Viśvedevas, the Householder shall keep
aside food enough for these offerings, and give the food to the seeker
for alms. The Religious Student, the Renunciate, the Student seeking for
knowledge, one who is supporting his preceptor, the way-farer and one
who is suffering from want of livelihood,—these are to be regarded as
*Bhikṣuka*, seeker for Alms.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

094	Having performed this Bali offering, he shall first feed his guest and, according to the rule, give alms to an ascetic (and) to a student.
</details>
