+++
title = "097 नश्यन्ति हव्य-कव्यानि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Rites in honour of the gods and those in honour of the Pitṛs performed by ignorant men become lost, when they are presented by the givers, through folly, to ash-like Brāhmaṇas.—(97)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१७९]:
     M G: bhasmībhūteṣu

पूर्वेण यादृश्ē देयं तत् पत्रम् उक्तम् । अनेनापत्रे ददतः प्रतिषेधः । **नश्यन्ति** निष्फलानि भवन्ति । **हव्यानि** देवतोद्देशेन यानि ब्राह्मणभोजनादीनि क्रियन्ते । पित्र्यकर्माङ्गभूतान्य् अन्यानि **कव्यानि** श्राद्धानि । **भस्मभूतेषु** । भस्मतां प्राप्ता भस्मभूता । उपमाने वा भूतशब्दः, भस्मानीव, यथा काष्ठभूत इति । किं पुनर् भस्मना साम्यम् । यथा तन् न क्वचिद् उपयुज्यते ऽवकररूपम् अपोह्यम् एवम् ईदृशो ब्राह्मणः क्रियाभ्यो ऽपोहितव्य इति तात्पर्यार्थः । **नराणाम् अविजानतां नश्यन्तीति** संबन्धः । **मोहाद् दत्तानि दातृभिः** । अविजानतां मोहाद् इति चानुवादः । यच् छास्त्रेणापोहितं तन् मोहाद् एव क्रियते ॥ ३.८७ ॥

_कीदृशाः पुनर् अभस्मभूताः । तान् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has described the person to whom presents are to be
made; the present verse proceeds to prohibit the giving of presents to
unqualified persons.

‘*Become lost*’—become fruitless.

‘*Rites in honour of the gods*’—Such acts as the feeding of Brāhmaṇas
and the like, which are done in honour of the gods.

‘*Rites in honour of the Pitṛs*’—those that form part of the acts done
in honour of one’s ancestors; *i.e*., *Śrāddhas*.

‘*Ash-like*—those who hav *become ashes* are called ‘*bhasmabhūta*. Or,
the term ‘*bhūta*’ may mean *similarity*; hence the word ‘*bhasmabhūta*’
means ‘*ash-like*;’ just as in the compound ‘*kāṣṭhabhūta*.’

“What is the point of similarity between *ash* and the *Brāhmaṇas?*”

The meaning is that, just as the ash is of no use, and is mere refuse
and deserves only to be thrown away, so the Brāhmaṇa in question is to
be removed from all religious functions.

‘*Made by ignorant men*’— this is to be construed with ‘*become lost*.’

‘*Presented by givers through folly*’—‘ignorant’ and ‘folly’ are only
re-iterations. Anything that is prohibited in the scriptures is done
only through folly.

The next verse describes what sort of Brāhmaṇas are not ‘ash-like.’—(97)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 434), where
‘*bhasmabhūteṣu*’ is explained as ‘those devoid of learning and
austerity’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.97-98)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.9-11).—‘The *Havya* and offerings are to be offered to the
Vedic scholar only; what is offered to the non-learned reaches neither
the Pitṛs nor the gods; gifts should be offered to one who is extremely
learned; there is nothing Wrong in ignoring the uneducated. In the
presence of flaming fire, one should not pour libations on ashes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.201, 202).—‘Cows, sesamum and gold should be given,
with due respects, to a qualified person; never should the wise man
desiring his own welfare make a gift to the unqualified. In fact, a man
devoid of learning and austerities should not accept any gift; if he
does accept them, he drags downwards both himself and the giver.’

*Vyāsa* (4.39,42,50,52,54,57).—‘If a man ignores the Brāhmaṇa student
near him, when offering food and gifts, he damages his merit extending
over three generations. Gift made to a non-Brāhmaṇa remains the same;
that made to the Brāhmaṇa becomes two-fold; that made to the Preceptor
becomes thousand-fold, and that made to the person learned in the Veda
becomes endless. The Brāhmaṇa’s mouth is the soil, fertile and free from
thorns; therein should one sow the seeds; such cultivation fulfils all
desires. When there comes to one’s house a Brāhmaṇa endowed with
learning and humility, all the herbs become delighted at the prospect of
(being eaten by him and thereby) reaching the highest state. One should
feed a mouth equipped with Veda, even though that person may have
already taken his food, rather than the illiterate person that may have
been fasting for six days. When the person learned in the Veda and
attentive to his duties takes his food, he brings to the giver rewards
endless and extending over many lives.’

*Āśvalāyana* (1.150).—‘If the good man offers food into the mouth of the
man learned in the Veda, he becomes freed from heinous sins, and attains
union with Brahman.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

097	The oblations to gods and manes, made by men ignorant (of the law of gifts), are lost, if the givers in their folly present (shares of them) to Brahmanas who are mere ashes.
</details>
