+++
title = "100 शिलान् अप्य्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A Brāhmaṇa staying unhonoured (in one’s house) takes away all his merit, even though he be one who subsists by gathering harvest-droppings, or offers oblations into the five fires.—(100)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्यन्तदरिद्रस्याप्य् अतिथिपूजाव्यतिक्रमो न युक्तः । **शिलान्** केदारलवनशेषान् । **उञ्छत** उच्चिन्वतः । एतच् च वृत्तिसंकोचोपलक्षणार्थम् । **पञ्चाग्नीन् अपि जुह्वतः** । अनेन शास्त्रानुष्ठानसंपन्नो ऽत्यन्तदरिद्रश् च यद्य् अतिथिम् आगतं न पूजयत्य् अन्नदानादिना, तदा तदनुष्ठानं स वृत्तिसंयमो निष्फलताम् एति । ततश् च **सर्वं सुकृतं** पुण्यम् **आदत्ते** अतिथिर् गृह्णाति निष्फलीकुरुते । **अनर्चितो वसन्** । तस्माद् अर्चयेद् इति विध्यर्थः । **वसन्न्** इति लिङ्गात् सायम् आगते विधिर् अयम् । **पञ्चाग्नयस्** त्रेता गृह्यः सभ्यश् च । 

- <u>अथ</u> को ऽयं सभ्यो नामाग्निः । 

- <u>एवं</u> ह स्माहुः । ग्रामान्तरे प्रोषितस्य यत्र लौकिकपाकः क्रियते महासाधनस्य बहुवेश्मसु यो गृह्यागाराद्[^१८१] एव शीतापनोदार्थं विह्रियते स सभ्यः । 


[^१८१]:
     M G: gṛhāgārād

- <u>होमस्</u> तर्हि तत्र कः । 

- <u>यावता</u> "तस्मिन् गृह्याणि" (ग्ध् ५.८) इति नियमः । अस्माद् एव वचनात् वैश्वदेवहोमः प्रोषितस्य लौकिके ऽप्य् अस्तीति मन्यन्ते । व्रीहियवैः शुष्कधान्यैर् यत्र लेलिहानं सुसमिद्धं पश्येत् तत्राभिजुहुयाद् इति स्मृतिवचनम् उदाहरन्ति । 

- इह भवन्तस् त्व् आहुः । उपनिषत्सु पञ्चाग्निविद्योक्ता । तत्र तेषां कल्पिताग्निरूपाणि । तद्रूपेण यद् उपासनं यच् च वेदनं स होम इति कल्प्यते । सा हि सर्वश्रौतेभ्यः कर्मभ्यो ऽतिशयफलेष्यते । एवं हि तत्राम्नायते "स्तेनो हिरण्यस्य सुरां पिबंश् च गुरोस् तल्पम् आवसन् ब्रह्महा च ते पतन्ति चत्वारः संसर्गी च" (छु ५.१०.९) । पञ्चानाम् अपि यत् फलं तद् अतिथाव् आराधिते ऽविमुखीकृते नश्यतीति प्रशंसातिशयेनावश्यकर्तव्यतां दर्शयति । 

- यद्य् अपि प्रातराशे ऽप्य् अतिथिभोजननियमः, सायं तु तद्व्यतिक्रमे प्रायश्चित्ताधिक्यम् । **यथाशक्तीति** पूर्वश्लोके ऽन्नविषयं ये मन्यन्ते, त एवम् आहुर् यथाशक्त्य् अतिथयः पूजयितव्याः, एको द्वौ बहव इति ॥ ३.९० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even for one who is extremely poor it is not right to omit the honouring
of the guest.

‘*Harvest-droppings*’— Ears of corn dropped in the fields after
harvesting.

‘*Gathering*’—Collecting.

This is meant to indicate difficulty of livelihood in general.

‘*Offers oblations into the five fires*.’

What is meant by this is that, even if the householder is one who obeys
all the injunctions of the scriptures, and he is also poor, and
(therefore) does not honour, with food &c., the guest that happens to
arrive,—then the said strict observance of the laws of livelihood
becomes fruitless. Hence (it is said) that the guest ‘*takes away all
his merit*’—*i.e*., nullities it;—if he ‘*stays unhonoured*.’ Hence one
should honour the guest—this is the meaning of the injunction.

The term ‘*slays*’ indicates that the injunction pertains to one who
arrives in the evening.

The ‘*five fires*’ are—The ‘Tretā’ (Three Sacrificial Fires), (4) the
‘*Gṛhya*’ (Domestic Fire) and (5) the ‘*Sabhya*’ (Social Fire).

“What is the fire called ‘*sabhya*,’ Social’?”

They offer the following explanation:—When one goes to another village,
and cooks his food in the ordinary fire;—or, in the house of a rich man
fire is lighted in several rooms for the alleviation of cold,—this is
what is called the ‘*sabhya*,’ ‘social’, ‘fire’.

“In that case, what is the *oblation* that would be offered in such a
fire? Since the rule is that⁽the *gṛhya* oblations are to be offered in
that fire (which is set up after marriage or after succession)’ \[
*Gautama* 5.7 & 8\]”.

On the strength of the present verse itself they say that, when the man
is away from home, he may offer the Vaiśvadeva oblations in the ordinary
fire also; and they quote the Smṛti-text—‘wherever one happens to see a
well-lighted flaming fire, he should offer into it oblations of dry
paddy, or of *vrīhi* and *yava*.’

Our revered teachers, however, offer the following explanation:—It is in
the Upaniṣads that the⁽science of the Five Fires’ has been described;
these five forms of fire have been assumed; and what is called
‘oblation’ here is the act of recognising the fire and worshipping it in
those forms. This worshipping has been recognised as leading to results
superior to those accomplished by means of all the *Śrauta* rites. In
connection with this, it has been declared that—‘the theft of gold, the
drinking of wine, having intercourse with the teacher’s wife and one who
kills the Brāhmaṇa,—all these four are fallen, as also one who has
relations with these \[ and even these sins are purified by the
knowledge of the science of Five Fires\].’

The result of all these five becomes lost if the guest is not honoured
and is sent away; this exaggerated praise is meant to convey the idea
that the said honouring of the guest is absolutely necessary.

In connection with the morning breakfast also there is the rule that the
guest should be fed; but the omission of it in the evening entails the
penalty of a higher expiatory site.

Some people do not take the phrase ‘to the best of his ability’ in the
preceding verse as applying to the ‘food; and they assert the meaning to
be that ‘guests should be honoured to the best of one’s ability—*i.e*.,
one or two or many (as many as one can).’—(100)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 355) in support of
the view that—‘if a guest comes to one’s house with a view to getting
food, and goes away without getting any, then all the rites that the
master of the house performs, in honour of the Gods and the Pitṛs,
become futile.’

The verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 441), which adds the
following explanations:—‘*Śilāt*’ (which is the reading it adopts)—‘from
the remnant of the gleanings dropped in the
fields.’—‘*uñchataḥ*’—‘pickings’;—what is meant is that even a poor man
should entertain his guest.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (67.33).—‘If a guest goes away disappointed from the home of any
person, he leaves behind him all his sins and takes away all the merit
of that householder.’

*Parāśara* (1.45.46).—‘If a guest goes away from one’s house
disappointed, his Pitṛs do not partake of anything in that house for
fifteen years. If one disappoints a guest, one’s libations are futile,
even though made with a thousand loads of fuel and a hundred jars of
butter.’

*Mahābhārata-Āśvamedhika* (Parsāharamādhava, p. 355).—‘One may study,
day after day, the Vedas and the subsidiaries, if he honours not his
guest, all study becomes futile. He who honours not the guest arrived
after the Viśvadeva offering, immediately becomes a Caṇḍāla. If a man
turns out a guest from his house, arrived at the right time and place,
he becomes an outcast at that very moment.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

100	A Brahmana who stays unhonoured (in the house), takes away (with him) all the spiritual merit even of a man who subsists by gleaning ears of corn, or offers oblations in five fires.
</details>
