+++
title = "101 तृणानि भूमिर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Grasses, place, water and kind word as the fourth,—even these never fail in the house of good people.—(101)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यदि दारिद्र्यात् सायम् अन्नदानं न घटते तदा नैवं मन्तव्यम्- "प्रधानम् अतिथेर् भोजनम्, तच् च मे नास्तीति, किम् अनेन मद्गृहे प्रविष्टेन" इति । यतो ऽशक्तस्य तृणादिदानेनाप्य् आतिथिपूजाविधिः स्यात् । अथ वा नायं विधिर् भोजन एव पर्यवस्यति, किं तर्हि निवत्स्यतः शयनादि दातव्यम् । **तृण**ग्रहणं स्रस्तरोपलक्षणार्थम् । **भूमिर्** आसनशयनविहारस्थानम् । **सूनृता वाक्** प्रियहितवचनं कथाप्रस्तावादि वा । **एतान्य् अप्य्** अन्नाभावे **सताम्** आगतस्यातिथेर् **नोच्छिद्यन्ते,** किं तु दीयन्ते सर्वकालम् ॥ ३.९१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If, through poverty, one is unable to provide food,—even then one should
not entertain such thoughts as these—‘feeding is the chief factor in the
honouring of a guest; this is not possible in my case; why then should I
let him enter my house?’ Because for one who is incapable of doing
anything else, even the providing of ‘grass,’ &c., would constitute the
act of ‘honouring the guest.’ Or, the meaning may be that the providing
of food alone does not constitute the full compliance with the
injunction of ‘honouring the guest;’ one has to provide bedding, &c.,
also.

‘*Grasses*’—stands for *bedding*.

‘*Place*’—*i.e*., space for sitting, sleeping and moving about.

‘*Kind words*’—*i.e*., words, sweet as well as wholesome; in the form of
conversation and stories, &c.

In the absence of food,’ ‘*even these never fail*’—*i.e*., are always
provided—‘*in the house of good people*.’—(101)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Compare Hitopadeśa, 1.33.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.107, p. 78), which explains it
to mean that if there is no food to be given, the guest may be duly
honoured even with ‘grasses, place, water and speech’;—also in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 441), where ‘*Sūnṛtā*’ is explained as
‘agreeable and true’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.4.14).—‘In the absence of all else, place,
water, grass and sweet words; these should never fail in any household.’

*Gautama* (5.36-37).—‘As a middle course, food shall he offered to one
who is not learned, but of good character; to one who is the reverse of
this, only grass, water, and place; or at least, a welcome.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.107).—‘The guest in the evening should not be deprived
of sweet words, place and water.’

*Pracetas* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 4?0).—‘If a person comes to the
house either after the Vaiśvadeva offerings, or in the evening, he
should be honoured like a god; he being called “a guest brought by the
sun.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘Then he should feed the guests in the order of
seniority.’

*Mahābhārata* (Āśvamedhika, Do., p. 441).—‘If a twice-born person
studies the Vedas along with all the subsidiaries, but does not honour
the guests, he studies it all in vain...... If a man honours not the
guest arriving after the Vaiśvadeva offerings, he, without doubt,
becomes a Caṇḍāla.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Āśvamedhika, pp. 442-443).—‘The guest, who is a Vedic
scholar or a religious student preparing for householdership, or a
life-long religious student, or a renunciate,—should observe the milking
time. If such a guest arrives at that time, one should receive him and
then take his food. If the householder takes his food before the guest
has been fed, the latter lakes away all his merit. That is why they
honour the guest........ To the guest who is fully endowed with age,
caste, learning, and austerity, he shall offer water for washing the
feet and for rinsing the mouth, and also food to the best of his power;
he should sit with him, and at night should retire to sleep after having
obtained his permission; he should rise, in the morning, before the
guest; and when he departs, he should accompany him up to either a
sacrificial altar or a garden or a park or a public hall or a watering
place or a tank or a temple or a place of large gatherings; and there
having greeted him according to the law, he shall come hack, having
requested him to come again.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 443).—‘If a guest arrives, ho should receive him
with welcome, the offering of a seat and also the washing of his feet;
as also with offering him food with due respect, and with agreeable
conversation; and he should please him by accompanying him when he
departs.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘Duty towards the guest is five-fold—one should offer him
one’s eye, mind, true and agreeable words, rising to welcome and
offering a seat.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 448).—‘Those who fail to make the Vaiśvadeva
offerings, and those who do not fulfil their obligations to the
guest,—all these go to hell and come to be horn as crows.’

*Mahābhārata* (Āśvamedhika, Do.).—‘Be the guest a *Caṇḍāla* or a
*Śvapāka* or a Kāleya, if he has come in time, he should he welcomed by
the householder.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘Be he a *Caṇḍāla*, or a sinner or an enemy or
a patricide, if he has arrived at the proper time and place, he should
be fed.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 449).—‘If a guest arrives,—be he a recluse or a
householder or an accomplished student,—to him he shall offer welcome,
water for washing the feet and rinsing the mouth, and seat; as also all
the vegetables that may be available; when he departs, he should go with
him; thus do his forefathers become pleased; and he should turn hack
only when permitted to do so by the guest; if he however stays at the
house, he should be duly attended upon.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

101	Grass, room (for resting), water, and fourthly a kind word; these (things) never fail in the houses of good men.
</details>
