+++
title = "119 राजर्त्विक्-स्नातक-गुरून् प्रिय-श्वशुर-मातुलान्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should receive, with the “honey-mixture,” the king, the priest, the accomplished Student, the Teacher, the Son-in-law, the Father-in-law and the Maternal uncle,—coming again after a year.—(119)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१९९]:
     M G 1st ed.: parisaṃvatsarāt

अतिथिपूजाप्रसङ्गेनान्येषाम् अपि केषांचित् पूज्यानां गृहागतानां पूजाविशेषो विधीयते । **राजा** अभिषिक्तो न क्षत्रियमात्रम् । अतिमहती ह्य् एषा पूजा, न तां सर्वः क्षत्रियो ऽर्हति । न हि स्नातकगुरुभ्यां तस्य सहोपदेशो युक्तः । पूजासाम्यं गुरुणा न तस्य युक्तम्, लिङ्गदर्शनाच् च । "तद् यथैवादो[^२००] मनुष्यराज आगते" (ऐत्ब् १.१५) इत्य् आतिथ्येष्टिब्राह्मणम्, गोवधो मधुपर्कविधाव् उक्तो गोघ्नो ऽतिथिर् इति पुरुषराजविषयं दर्शयति । तेन क्षत्रिये ऽक्षत्रिये वा जनपदेश्वरे पूजेयं प्रयोक्तव्या । शूद्रे तु नास्ति मन्त्रवत्त्वम् ।


[^२००]:
     M G J: yathaivānyo (I follow AitB reading)

- <u>ननु</u> च शूद्रस्य मन्त्रोच्चारणं निषिद्धम् । न पुनः शूद्रसंप्रदानके कर्मणि ब्राह्मणादीनाम् ।

- <u>नैष दोषः</u> । अर्घाणाम् अपि "भूतेभ्यस् त्वा" इत्यादिमन्तोच्चारणम् अस्ति ।

- <u>ननु</u> च महाभारते शूद्रकर्तृकम् अपि मधुपर्ककर्म श्रूयते । 

- तद् अर्हम् आसनं चैव यथावत् प्रत्यवेदयत् ।

- मधुपर्कं च गां चैव तस्मै भगवते स्वयम् ॥ (च्ड़्। म्भ् २.५.५)

भगवते वासुदेवाय विदुर इति । तत्साधने दधनि भक्त्या मधुपर्कशब्दः प्रयुक्तः । तादर्थ्यात् तच्छब्दो भवति,  आयुर् वै घृतम् इतिवत्[^२०१] । राजशब्दस् तावज् जानपदेश्वरवचनो न क्षत्रियमात्रे वर्तते । **प्रियो** जामातेय् आहुः । **स्नातको** विद्याव्रताभ्याम् उभाभ्याम् । अन्यथार्त्विग्गुरवः सर्वे स्नातका एव । आश्रमान्त्रस्थानां भैक्षचर्या विहिता, न त्व् अतिथिधर्मेण भोजनम् । अथ वाचिरनिर्वृत्तवेदाध्ययनः स्नातको गृह्यते । एतान् **अर्हयेत्** पूजयेत् । **मधुपर्क**शब्दः कर्मनामधेयम् । गृह्यात् तस्य स्वरूपावगमः । **परिसंवत्सरान्** इति राजादिपूज्यविशेषणम् । परिगतो ऽतिक्रान्तः संवत्सरो येषां तान् । यदि संवत्सरे ऽतीते आगच्छन्ति तदा मधुपर्कार्हा अर्वाङ् न[^२०२] । 


[^२०२]:
     G 1st ed.: arcārhāḥ


[^२०१]:
     M G 1st ed.: āyuṣyam iti for āyur vai ghṛtam itivat

- <u>केचिद्</u> एवं व्याचक्षते । यदि संवत्सराद् अर्वाग् आगच्छन्ति तदानतीते ऽपि संवत्सरे प्रथमपूजायाः पुनर् लभते पूजाम् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुः । सांवत्सरिकी तेषां पूजा, न यावद् आगमनम् । अस्मिन् पक्षे ऽर्वाग् आगमनं न पूजाप्रतिबन्धकम् । 

- पाठान्तरं "परिसंवत्सराद्" इति । यावद् एव संवत्सरं तावत् परिसंवत्सरात् तत ऊर्ध्वं पुनः पूज्या इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ३.१०९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In course of the entertaining of guests, the Text proceeds to lay down
the special form of honouring of a few other respected persons also.

‘*King*’—stands here for the annointed king of men, and not for the mere
*Kṣatriya* in general. The honour here prescribed is a very great one,
and every *Kṣatriya* does not deserve it. Nor would it be right to speak
of an ordinary *Kṣatriya* along with the ‘accomplished student’ and the
‘teacher;’ for there can be no similarity between the honour accorded to
the Teacher and to an ordinary *Kṣatriya*. There are Vedic texts also
indicative of the same conclusion. For instance, in the
*Ātithyeṣṭi-Brāhmaṇa* we read—‘the guest is like a *king of men*
arrived;’ and in connection with the rule of killing a cow for the
offering of ‘Honey-mixture,’ we find the guest spoken of as ‘the killer
of cows;’ all which goes to show that the said offering is meant for the
*king of men*. Hence the honour here mentioned is to be paid to a king
of men, irrespective of his being a *Kṣatriya* or not. But so far as the
*Śūdra* king of men is concerned, no honours are to be paid to him which
are accompanied by the recitation of Vedic Mantras.

“All that is prohibited is the uttering of *mantras* by the *Śūdra*;
there is no prohibition of the reciting of *mantras* by the Brāhmaṇa and
others at an offering made to the *Śūdra*.”

This does not affect our position; as the persons honoured have also got
to recite certain *mantras*, such as ‘*bhūtebhyastvā*, &c.’

“But in the *Mahābhārata* we read of the Honey-mixture offered by the
*Śūdra* also: ‘He himself offered to the Blessed Lord a seat fit for
him, as also the Honey-mixture and the cow,’—where Vidura is described
as offering it to Vāsudeva.”

In such cases, the term ‘honey-mixture’ is used figuratively in the
sense of *curd*, which is one of the ingredients of that mixture; and,
in common usage, the name of a thing is applied to another when the
latter helps in the bringing into existence of the former; when, for
instance, Butter is spoken of as ‘longevity’ itself.

From all this it is clear that the term ‘*king*’ here denotes the *king
of men*, and not the mere *Kṣatriya*.

The term ‘*priya*’ has been declared to mean the *son-in-law*.

‘*Accomplished student*’—*i.e*., accomplished, not in learning ail’d
observances both (but only in learniug, still keeping up the
observances). If it had stood for one who has accomplished and finished
*both*, then, since the ‘Teacher’ and the ‘Priest’ also would be such
‘accomplished students’ (there would be no point in mentioning these
separately). As for people in the other states (of the Recluse, etc.),
for these feeding on alms has been prescribed, and not eating in the
manner of ‘guests.’ Or, the term ‘*snātaka*,’ ‘*accomplished student*’
may stand for one who has only recently completed his course of Vedic
Study.

‘*He should receive*’—honour—all these.

The term ‘*honey-mixture*’ is the name of a rite; and the exact form of
this rite is to be learnt from the *Gṛhyasūtras*.

‘*Parisamvatsarān*,’ ‘*cominy after a year*,’—qualifies the King and
other persons to be honoured. The term means ‘over whom one year has
passed.’ The meaning is that they are entitled to the honour of the
‘honey-mixture,’ if they come after a year, not before that.

Some people explain the verse to mean that if they, happen to come
before the year, then, even though the full year may not have elapsed
since the last offering was made, yet they are to receive the offering.
Hut others hold that the honouring here prescribed is an annual
function; and not as often as they may come; and under this view, the
mere fact of their coming before the year is entirely out cannot be an
obstacle to the honour being offered.

Another reading is ‘*parisamvatsarāt*;’ which means that the honour is
to be held in abeyance for a year; after that they should be
honoured.—(119)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Priyaḥ*’—‘Son-in-law’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘Friend’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Parisaṃvatsarān*’—Kullūka reads ‘*parisaṃvatsarāt*.’

“The Mahābhārata has here *parisaṃvatsaroṣitān*, ‘gone a year on a
journey.’”—(Hopkins).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 454) as laying down
the ‘Madhuparka’ offering for the King and some others.

*Medhātithi* (Footnote, p. 237.)—The printed editions have wrongly
treated the verse ‘*yadyadiṣṭatamam &c*.’ as Manu’s text. It is only a
part of Medhātithi’s comment, quoted by him as the ‘*Smṛtyantara*’
referred to by him in line 16.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.119-120)  
**

*Gautama* (5.28-30).—‘The Priest, the Teacher, the Father-in-law, the
paternal uncle and the maternal uncle,—when these arrive the
Honey-mixture is to be offered; again on the lapse of a year; and also
before the marriage and the sacrifice.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.8.5-9).—‘The Vedic Scholar deserves the cow
and the honey-mixture; as also the Teacher, the Priest, the Accomplished
Student, and the King, if he be righteous; to the Teacher, the Priest,
the Father-in-law and the King, the cow and the Honey-mixture shall be
offered when they come after the lapse of one year; the Honey-mixture
consists of curd mixed with honey, or water mixed with honey, or, in the
absence of other things, water only.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.1).—‘Six persons deserve to be honoured: the Priest, the
bridegroom, the king, the paternal uncle, the Accomplished Student and
the maternal uncle.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.109-110).—‘One shall offer either a big bull or a big
goat to the Vedic scholar, as also honour, attendance, delicious food
and sweet words; once every year are to be entertained the Accomplished
Student, the Teacher, the King; as also the friend and the bridegroom,
and the Priests when going to officiate at a sacrifice.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.24.1-4).—‘After having appointed the Priest,
he shall offer to him the Honey-mixture; also to an Accomplished Student
that may happen to arrive; also to the King, the Teacher, the
Father-in-law, the paternal uncle and the maternal uncle.’

*Pāraskara* (1.3. 1-3).—‘Six persons deserve to be honoured: the
Teacher, the Bridegroom, the King, the dear friend, and the Accomplished
Student; these shall be entertained once every year; also the Priests
that are going to officiate at a sacrifice.’

*Gobhila* (4.10.23-26).—‘Six persons are deserving of the honour of
entertainment: the Teacher, the Priest, the Accomplished Student, the
Bridegroom, the dear friend and the guest; these should be entertained
after the lapse of one year; and also at marriage and at a sacrifice.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

119	Let him honour with the honey-mixture a king, an officiating priest, a Snataka, the teacher, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, and a maternal uncle, (if they come) again after a full year (has elapsed since their last visit).
</details>
