+++
title = "120 राजा च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king and the Learned Man should be honoured with the Honey-mixture, at the approach of a sacrificial performance,—not if there is no sacrifice (going to be performed).—(120)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यज्ञे निमित्ते[^२०३] ऽर्वाग् अपि संवत्सरात् प्राप्त्यर्थो ऽयम् इति <u>केचित्</u> ।


[^२०३]:
     M: yajñanimitte; G: yajñe nirvṛtte

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु पूर्वस्यैव राजश्रोत्रिययोर् उपसंहारम् आहुः । अनुपसंहारे हि **न त्व् अयज्ञ** इति नोपपद्यते । अत्र **श्रोत्रियो** यः स्नातकः प्राग् उक्तः, यदि वा ऋत्वग् एव । तस्य हि यज्ञकर्मणि प्रारिप्स्यमाने मधुपर्कदानं[^२०४] विहितम् । यद्य् अप्य् असकृत् संवत्सरस्य सोमेन यजेत, कृतार्घ्या एवैनं याजयेयुः । एवं कॢप्तमूलैषा स्मृतिर् भविष्यति । इतरथा कल्प्येत मूलम् । 


[^२०४]:
     M G 1st ed.: gor madhu-

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु सर्वान् ऋत्विगादीञ् छ्रोत्रियशब्देन निर्दिष्टान् मन्यन्ते । तथा चाविशेषेण गौतमेन पठितम्- "ऋत्विगाचार्यश्वशुरपितृव्यमातुलानाम् उपस्थाने मधुपर्कः"[^२०५] इत्य् उक्त्वा "यज्ञविवाहयोर् अर्वाक्" इति पठितवान् (ग्ध् ५.२७, २९) । अतश् च सर्वेषाम् एवार्घ्याणां यज्ञे निमित्ते[^२०६] ऽर्वाग् अपि संवत्सराद् अर्घार्हता स्यात् । **न त्व् अयज्ञ** इति च प्रतिषेधो ऽर्वाक् संवत्सरान् नोर्ध्वम् इत्य् एवं ज्ञेयः । 


[^२०६]:
     M G: nirmite


[^२०५]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: ācārya

- इह द्वितीये पादे ऽनेकधा पाठप्रतिपत्तिः । <u>केचित्</u> पठन्ति । "तते यज्ञ उपस्थितौ" इति । तेषां अयम् अर्थः । "तते" प्रारब्धे यज्ञे यदि प्राप्तौ भवतो निमन्त्र्यानीतौ,[^२०७] तदेयं मधुपर्कक्रिया तयोः । न पुनः प्रारभ्यमाणे ।


[^२०७]:
     G: nimantrānītau

- <u>एष पक्षः</u> कैश्चिद् दूष्यते । दीक्षितो न ददातीति दीक्षितस्य सर्वदानप्रतिषेधान् मधुपर्कदानम् अनुज्ञायमानं तद्विरुद्धं स्यात् । न च शक्यं वक्तुम्- "दानम् एतन् न भवति, अर्हयेद् इति नोदनात् पूजैषा विधीयते" । यतो ऽस्ति मधुपर्के दधिदानं मांसभोजनादिदानं च । अथोच्यते । "स्वयम् एव तत्परकीयं भुज्यते" इति । एवं सति स्तेयदोषः स्यात् । "वचनान् न" इति चेद् अस्त्य् एव तर्हि ददात्यर्थः । चोदितं च ददातिः,[^२०८] मधुपर्कं च दद्याद् इति । तस्माद् विरुद्धम् । दीक्षितो न ददातीत्य् अनेन स्याद् विरोधः यदि यज्ञशब्दः सोमयागेष्व् एव वर्तते । दर्शपूर्णमासादयो ऽपि यागाः, तद्विषयो ऽयं विधिर् भविष्यति ।


[^२०८]:
     M G: dadaditi

- <u>नैतद् युक्तम्</u> । एवं सति समाचारविरोधः । न हि शिष्टाः सोमयागेभ्यो ऽन्यत्र क्वचिद् अर्घ्याय मधुपर्कम् आहरन्ति । आचारो वेदादरः । अतो ऽयम् एव पाठो युक्तः- "**यज्ञकर्मण्य् उपस्थिते**" इति । प्रारभ्यमाणयज्ञ आगतं शिष्टा मधुपर्केण पूजयन्ति, न प्रवृत्तयज्ञाः । अतश् चैतद् अपि न विचारयामः । सामान्यतः प्राप्तस्य दानस्य भवतु निवृत्तिर् न पुनस् तद्विषयतयैव श्रुतस्य । यज्ञश् चासौ कर्म च तद् **यज्ञकर्म** तस्मिन्न् उपस्थिते प्राप्ते ॥ ३.११० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people hold that this verse serves to prescribe the honouring even
before the lapse of a year, if the persons happen to Arrive in
connection with a sacrifical peformance. Others, however, take it as
completing what has been said in the preceding verse; and if it be not
taken in this sense, then the statement ‘not if there is no sacrifice’
remains inexplicable.

The term ‘*learned man*’ here may be taken as standing either for the
person spoken of above as ‘accomplished student,’ or for the Priest; it
is for the latter that the offering of ‘Honey-mixture,’ when the
sacrifice is going to be performed, has been laid down. Though one would
perform the Soma-sacrifice several times during the year, yet the
Priests would help in the performance only if they have been duly
honoured. Thus it is only if taken in this sense that the text comes to
have a well-established basis (in the Veda). In any other sense, it will
have to have its basis assumed.

Others, however, take the term ‘*learned man*’ as referring to the
Priest and all the rest of them (mentioned in the preceding verse). In
fact, Gautama has said this in a general way: Having said that ‘the
honey-mixture is to be offered in the reception of the priest, the
father-in-law, the paternal uncle and the maternal uncle, (5-25), he
says ‘before the sacrifice and the marriage’ (5.27). And from this it is
clear that at the time that a sacrifice is going to be performed, all
those who deserve to be honoured should be honoured even before the
lapse of the year.

‘*Not if there is no sacrifice*;’—this prohibition applies to the
honouring before t he year is over, and not that which comes after it.

In connection with the second foot of the verse, there are several
readings:

Some people read ‘*tate yajñe upasthitau*,’ ‘who arrive when a sacrifice
has commenced;’ and they explain this to mean that ‘the honey-mixture’
is to be offered to them only if they come, by invitation, when the
performance of the sacrifice *has commenced*, and not when it is only
*going to be commenced*.

This view is objected to by some persous: In view of the general rule
that ‘the person initiated for sacrifice should not offer anything,’ all
offering is prohibited for the initiated sacrificer; so that, if the
offering of honey-mixture were now permitted, this would be contrary to
the said general rule. It will not be right to argue (in answer to this
that—“this is not an *offering*, since the injunction is that he *should
honour them*, so that it is *honouring* that is enjoined;” because in
the rite of the ‘Honey-mixture, ‘there is an actual *offering* of curd,
as also of meat and food. If it be said that “the man eats what belongs
to another person (without the latter *offering* it),”—in that case, the
act would involve the sin of theft. It may be argued that, “in view of
the direct assertion permitting such an act, it could not be regarded as
*theft*.” But in that case, the act of *giving* is there; in fact, th e
*giving* or *offering* also is actually enjoined in such texts as
‘should offer the honey-mixture.’ Hence the act would be contrary to
law. “The offering would be contrary to the law that ‘the Initiated
Sacrificer should not offer anything,’ only if the term ‘Sacrifice’
always stood for the *Soma-sacrifice* (in connection with which we have
the said prohibition); as a matter of fact, however, the terra stands
for the *Darśa- Pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices also; and the present injunction
may be taken as pertaining to these latter.” This also will not be
right; as, in this case, it will be contrary to usage: as a matter of
fact, cultured people do not offer the Honey-mixture to honoured persons
at any other sacrifice except the Soma-sacrifice; and Usage always
follows the Veda.

For all these reasons, the right reading is ‘*yajñakarmaṇyupasthite*’
(as we have explained already). As a matter of fact, it is only when an
honoured person arrives when the sacrificial performance is going to
commence that cultured persons receive him with the Honey-mixture; and
not after the performance has commenced. For this reason we do not even
stop to consider the point that the prohibition (of offering by the
Initiated Person) pertains to the act of *giving* in general, and not to
that act of *offering or giving* which has been enjoined in connection
with the sacrifice itself.

The compound ‘*yajñakarma*’ is to be expounded as the *Karmadhāraya*
compound: when this performance is approaching—going to be
performed.—(120)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to one opinion, given by Medhātithi, and according to
Govindarāja, Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa, this rule is a limitation of verse
119, and means that the two persons mentioned shall not receive the
‘Honey-mixture,’ except when they come dining the performance of a
sacrifice, however long a period may have elapsed since their last
visit—According to another explanation, mentioned by Medhātithi, and
according to Nandaṇa and Rāghavānanda, the verse means that a King and a
Śrotriya, who come, after a year since their last visit on the occasion
of a sacrifice, shall receive the *Madhuparka*.—The term ‘*Śrotriya*’
refers, according to Medhātithi, to a *Snātaka* or to an officiating
priest;—according to ‘others’ quoted by him, to all the persons
mentioned in the preceding verse;—according to Govindarāja, Kullūka,
Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda, to a *Snātaka*.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 455) in support of
the view that *Madhuparka* is to be offered to a King only if he is also
a ‘*Śrotriya*,’ ‘learned in the Veda’, not otherwise;—‘*Śrotriyaḥ*’
being taken as qualifying ‘*rājā*.’—It is difficult to see how the
writer will construe the term ‘*Sampūjyau*’ (in the dual number).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.119-120)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.119].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

120	A king and a Srotriya, who come on the performance of a sacrifice, must be honoured with the honey-mixture, but not if no sacrifice is being performed; that is a settled rule.
</details>
