+++
title = "121 सायन् त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Out of the food cooked in the evening the wife should offer the Bali-oblation, without sacred formulas. This is the “Vaiśvadeva” rite which has been enjoined for both Morning and evening.—(121)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तः प्रथमः । इदानीं द्वितीयः पाक उच्यते । **सायं** दिनान्तः प्रदोषस् तत्र सिद्धस्यान्नस्य सर्वः पाकयज्ञिकविधिर्[^२०९] आवर्तनीयो ब्रह्मयज्ञपितृयज्ञवर्जम् । 


[^२०९]:
     M G: pākayajñiyo vidhir

- <u>ननु</u> च **बलिं हरेद्** इत्य् एतावच् छ्रुतम् । बलिहरणं च प्रसिद्ध्या भूतयज्ञ एव । तत्र कुतो ऽग्नौ होमो ऽतिथ्यादिदानं च । अथ **वैस्वदेवं हि नामैतद्** इति वैश्वदेवशब्दः सर्वार्थतां प्रतिपादयति । विश्वेषां देवानाम् इदं विधीयते । **सायंप्रातर्** यादृशं प्रातस् तादृशम् एव सायम् एतदर्थम् एव प्रातःशब्दः । अन्यथा प्रातर्विहितम् एव, किम् अनेन सायंप्रातर् विधीयते । एवं तर्हि ब्रह्मयज्ञपितृयज्ञाव् अपि कर्तव्यौ ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । **अन्नस्य सिद्धस्येति** वचनाद् यद् अन्नसाध्यं तद् एव कर्तव्यम् । न त्व् अध्ययनसाध्यो ब्रह्मयज्ञो नाप्य् उदकसाध्यं तर्पणम् । एवं च संबन्धः क्रियते । सिद्धस्यान्नस्य बलिं हरेत् । एतद् वैश्वदेवाख्यं कर्मान्नस्य सिद्धस्योभयोः कालयोर् विधीयते । अन्नशब्दाद् वैश्वदेवशब्दाच्[^२१०] चैवं व्याख्यायते ।


[^२१०]:
     J: -śabdaś

- **अमन्त्रम्** । मन्त्रशब्देन देवतोद्देशेन शब्दवान् स्वाहाकारान्तो ऽग्नये स्वाहेत्य् एवमादिर् निषिध्यते । न ह्य् अन्ये मन्त्रा वैश्वदेवेषु विनियुक्ताः । तेषु च मन्त्रत्वं प्रशंसयोच्यते । न तु[^२११] स्वाध्याये ऽपठितानां मन्त्रत्वम् अस्ति । स्वाध्यायैकदेशः कश्चिद् ऋग्यजुःसामाद्यात्मको वेदाध्यायिभिर् मन्त्र इति व्यवह्रियते । व्यवहारतश् च पदार्थावगमनम् । न च[^२१२] यैः शब्दैर् बलिहरणादि क्रियते ते कुत्रचित् पठ्यन्ते । "केवलम् अग्न्यादिभ्यो देवेभ्यो होमं कुर्यात्" इति श्रुतेः, "स्वाहाकारेण वा वषट्कारेण वा देवेभ्यो हविः संप्रदीयते" इति वाक्यान्तरेण सर्वहोमेषु स्वाहाकारो विहितः, याज्यान्ते वषट्कारो नियमितः- "याज्यायां वषट्करोति" इति । स्वाहाकारशब्दयोगे चतुर्थी स्मर्यते । अतो यागो देवताया उद्देश्यत्वात्, उद्देश्यत्वं च देवतायाः शब्दावगम्यरूपत्वात्, शब्देनैवोचितत्वात्, इयं घटना क्रियते "अग्नये स्वाहा" इत्यादि ।


[^२१२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na ca


[^२११]:
     M G: nanu

- <u>यद्य् एवं</u> तेषां निषेधः, कथं तर्हि यागनिर्वृत्तिः । न हि "तुभ्यम् इदं न मदीयम्" इति यावद् उद्देशो न कृतस् तावद् यागस्वरूपनिर्वृत्तिः । न हि त्यागः केवलो याग उद्देशशून्यः ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । शब्दे[^२१३] निषिद्धे मनसोद्देशं देवतायाः पत्नी करिष्यति । यथा शूद्रो नमस्कारम् उच्चारयति । "अनुज्ञातो ऽस्य नमस्कारो ऽमन्त्रः"[^२१४] (ग्ध् १०.६४) नमस्कारेण प्रत्याम्नातः शूद्रस्य मन्त्र इति नमस्कारो ऽनुज्ञातो ऽस्य, न देवतापदम् । तत्र च[^२१५] देवताया विनियोगात् सिद्धिर्[^२१६] इत्य् उक्तम् । इह भवन्तस् त्व् आहुः- स्वाहाकारो नमस्कारेण प्रत्याम्नातः शूद्रस्य, देवतापदं त्व् अनिषिद्धम् । 


[^२१६]:
     M G 1st ed.: viniyogasiddhir


[^२१५]:
     M G: na ca for tatra ca


[^२१४]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: anujñāto 'sya namaskāro 'mantraḥ


[^२१३]:
     M G: śabdair

- <u>अथ</u> सायंवैश्वदेवहोमे कः कर्ता । 

- <u>उक्तं</u> पत्न्य् एव संनिधानाद् बलिहरणवद् अमन्त्रकं करिष्यतीति ॥ ३.१११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first cooking has been described: the second rooking is now
described.

‘*Evening*’—end of day, the advent of night; out(?) of the food cooked
at that time all the rites pertaining to the ‘Fire Sacrifices’ have to
be repeated, with the exception of the ‘*Brahmayajña*’ (Vedic Study) and
the ‘*Pitṛyajña*’ (*Śrāddha*).

“All that the text says is that she should offer the ‘Bali-oblation;’
and in ordinary usage it is only the⁴ *Bhūtayajña*’ (the offering to
elementals) that is called ‘*bali*.’ So that, whence do we get (out of
the words of the Text) either the pouring of libations into fire, or the
offering of food to guests &c.? in answer to this the following might be
urged—‘The offering prescribed in the verse is spoken of by the name
*Vaiśvadeva*, and the term, *Vaiśradeva*, denotes that the offering is
meant *for all*, being prescribed for *all gods* (*viśve devāḥ*). In
fact the term, *both morning and evening*, clearly indicates that the
offering in the evening is to be precisely similar to that in the
morning; it is for the purpose of conveying this sense that the term
*morning* has been used. If it were not so, then, since the *morning*
-offering has been already prescribed before, why should it have been
necessary to say here that it has been enjoined for both *morning and
evening*?” But in that case, the *Brahmayajña* and the *Pitṛyajña* also
should have to be performed (in the evening also),”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The phrase ‘*out of the food
cooked*’ clearly indicates the doing of that alone which can be done
with the *food*,— and not of the *Brahmayajña*, which is done by means
of *Vedic Study*, nor of ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ (), which is done with *water*. We
construe the words of the Text as follows ‘*out of the food cooked, the
Bali-oblation should be offered*, and this rite, called Vaiśvadeva, is
prescribed as to be done out of the food cooked, both morning and
evening.’ That such is the meaning we deduce from the use of the term
‘*food*’ and that of the term ‘*vaiśvadeva*

‘*Without sacred formulas*;’—what is interdicted is the use of
expressions containing the names of the deity and ending with the
syllable ‘*svāhā*;’ such expressions, for instance, as ‘*agnaye svāhā*,’
and the like; no other sacred formulas have been prescribed in
connection with the *Vaiśvadeva* offerings; the said expressions are
called ‘sacred formulas’ (*mantra*) only with a view to eulogise them;
the real character of ‘*mantra*’ cannot belong to any expressions not
occurring in the Veda; all students of Veda accept that only as
‘*mantra*’ which forms part of the Veda, either in the form of *Ṛk,
Yajuṣ* or *Sāman*; and the meaning of words is ascertained from usage
only. Those expressions with which the *Bali* and other oblations are
made are not found in the text of any Veda; all that the *Śruti* says is
that ‘oblations should be offered to Agni and other deities;’ the use of
the syllable ‘*svāhā*’ also in the offering of all oblations is enjoined
in another text, which says that ‘oblations are offered to gods either
with the syllable *svāhā* or *vaṣaṭ*;’ but the use of the syllable
‘*vaṣiṭ*’ has been restricted to the end of the ‘*yājyā*’ *mantras* only
by the declaration ‘one should pronounce *vaṣaṭ* at the end of the
*yājyā*.’ In connection with the syllable ‘*svāhā*,’ the grammatical
rules lay down the use of the Dative affix. Thus it is that it becomes
necessary to use such verbal expressions as ‘*agnaye svāhā*,’ and the
like, because every secrificial offering is aimed for a deity, and it is
only by means of words that we know for which deity it is aimed.

“Under the circumstances, as the use of these expressions is prohibited,
how can the sacrifice he regarded as accomplished? For so long as the
gift is not completed by the assertion ‘this is for you, it is no longer
mine,’ the sacrifice cannot be regarded as accomplished. Merely giving
up a thing, without special reference to a recipient, cannot be called a
‘sacrifice’.”

This is true: the verbal reference to the gods being prohibited, the
wife shall make the reference mentally.Just as when the *Śūdra*
pronounces the syllable ‘*namḥ*,’ the use of the Mantra being replaced
in his case by that syllable—as declared by Gautama, who says ‘For the
*Śūdra* the syllable *namaḥ* has been ordained as the *mantra*’ (10.64);
and the utterance of the name of the deity is not permitted for him. And
yet it has been declared that even in this case the offering to the
Deity becomes duly accomplished. The revered teachers, however, have
declared that it is only the syllabic ‘*svāhā*’ that is to be replaced
by the syllable ‘*namaḥ*,’ and that the utterance of the name of the
Deity has not been prohibited.

*Question*:—“ Who is the real performer of the Vaiśvadeva offering in
the evening?”

*Answer*:—It has been already asserted that it is the wife, who will
make the offering without mantras; and this because she will be near
by.—(121)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 315), which adds the
following notes:—The first sentence here extends upto ‘*nāmaitat*’;
‘*sāyamprātarvidhīyate*’ being a totally distinct sentence; the latter
serves to enjoin the necessity of making the *Vaiśvadeva-offering* both
morning and evening. The meaning thus comes to be that it is only in the
evening that the wife is entitled to perform the ‘*Vaiśvadeva rite*’ *in
the form of the Bali-offering*. Some people hold that the
‘Bali-offering’ herein laid down as to be done by the wife indicates the
*Vaiśvadeva* offering also, and is not meant to be a substitute for the
latter.

It is quoted also in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 929), which 1ms the
following notes:—One sentence runs up to ‘*nāmaitat*’, and
‘*sāyamprātarvidhīyate*’ is another sentence, laying down the two times
for *Vaiśvadeva* offering. It is to this *offering* in the evening alone
that the wife is entitled; and it is not right, as some people have
held, that the name ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ here stands for the entire rite of
that name, including the *Homa* also; because *Homa* has been expressly
forbidden for women. Others again have held that the singular number in
‘*balim*’ indicates that the only offering that the wife is to make is
that which is made in the sky, *i*.*e*., the ‘*Vaihāyasa-bali*’. But
this also is not right; because in the same context as the present,
another text uses the plural form, ‘*balīn haret*’. Thus the conclusion
is that the entire offering is to be made in the evening either by the
man or his wife.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 403), which adds
the following explanation:—*Bali-offering* without mantras, with food
cooked in the evening, is to be done by the wife only in the absence of
the House-holder and his sons;—‘*Homa*’ by women being generally
interdicted by several texts.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 145) which explains it to mean that—‘*in
the absence of males*, the wife should offer *Vaiśvadeva-bali* without
mantras.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gobhila* (1. 4.19).—‘The Bali is to be offered by the woman in the
evening, and by the man in the morning.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 145).—‘The Vaiśvadeva-offering and the
Bali-offering should be made both morning and evening, even though the
man himself may not take any food.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

121	But the wife shall offer in the evening (a portion) of the dressed food as a Bali-oblation, without (the recitation of) sacred formulas; for that (rite which is called the) Vaisvadeva is prescribed both for the morning and the evening.
</details>
