+++
title = "122 पितृयज्ञन् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Month after Month, on the moonless day, the Brāhmaṇa with the Fire shall, after having performed the Pitṛyajña, offer the “Piṇḍānvāhāryaka.”—(122)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वैश्वदेविकाद् वैकल्पिकाच् छ्राद्धान् नित्यम् इदं श्राद्धान्तरम् उच्यते । **चन्द्रक्षये** ऽमावास्यायाम् । तत्रापि न यस्यां कस्यांचन वेलायां किं तर्हि **पितृयज्ञं निर्वर्त्य** । श्रौतो यः पिण्डपितृयज्ञस् तं कृत्वा । एवं च यस् तस्य कालः स एवास्यापि लभ्यते । तद् उक्तम् अमावास्यायाम् अपराह्णे पिण्डपितृयज्ञ इति । अनाहिताग्नेर् अप्य् औपासनयोगो ऽस्त्य् एव । तथा चाह । "एवम् अनाहिताग्निर् नित्ये श्रपयित्वा" इत्यादि । **अग्निमान्** वैवाहिकेनाग्निना तद्वान्, दायकालाहृतेन वा । विप्रग्रहणम् अविवक्षितम् । क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् अपीष्यते । एवं स्मृत्यन्तरेषु ह्य् अविसेषणोक्तम् । **पिण्डान्वाहार्यकम्** इति । नामधेयम् इदम् अस्य श्राद्धस्य । पिण्डानाम् अनु पश्चाद् आह्रियते ऽनुष्ठीयते । तत् **पिण्डान्वाहार्यकं** भवति । मासश् चानुमासश् च, तयोर् भवं **मासानुमासिकम्** । मासानुमासशब्दसमुदायो मासगतां वीप्साम् आचष्टे । मासि मासि कर्तव्यम् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । अतश् च नित्यतासिद्धिः । यद्य् अप्य् अनुमासशब्दाद् वीप्सावगतिर् भवति, मासशब्दो ऽतिरिच्यते, तथापि पद्यग्रन्थे गौर्वं नाद्रियते । **श्राद्धम्** इत्य् एतद् अपि नामैव । **कुर्याद्** इति विधिः ॥ ३.११२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*The śrāddha* described here is the compulsory one, as distinct from the
*Vaiśvadeva-śrāddha*, which is optional.

‘*On the moon-leas day*’— on the *Amāvāsya* day. There also not at any
and every time, but only ‘*after having performed the Pitṛyajña*.’ That
is, after having performed that *Ptṛyajña* which has been prescribed in
the *Śruti*. Thus the time for the *Śrāddha* in question comes to be the
same as that for this latter; and in connection with this it has been
laid down that the *Piṇḍapitṛyajña* is to be performed on the *Amāvāsya*
day, in the afternoon.’

Even for one who has not set up the fire, the performance of such
offerings is essential; as it is declared—‘the person who has not set up
the fire having made the accessary offerings &c.’

‘*The Brāhmaṇa with the fire*’—*i.e*., he who is keeping up the
marriage-fire, or who has set up the fire since succession to his
property. No significance is meant to be attached to the mention of the
‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’ since the *śrāddha* in question is meant to be performed
by the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya* also; hence it is that other *smṛtis*
have prescribed this *śrāddha* without special reference to any
particular caste.

‘*Piṇḍānvāhārya* *kam*;’—this is the proper name of this *śrāddha*; the
etymological explanation is that ‘that which is offered along with balls
of food, *Piṇḍas*, is *piṇḍānvāhāryaka*.’

‘*Month after month*,’—in one month, and also in another month. The
compound word connotes monthly repetition; thus the meaning is that the
*śrāddha* is to be performed every month. Thus it is that its compulsory
character becomes established. Though the term ‘*anumāsa*’ alone
dignities repetition, and the second term ‘*māsa*’ is superfluous, yet
prolixity (anti redundance) is not minded in a metrical treatise.—(122)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“The sacrifice identified by the term *Pitṛyajña* is the so-called
*Piṇḍapitṛyajña*, a Śrauta rite (Āśvalāyana, Śrauta-sūtra 2.6-7); and
*Piṇḍānvāhāryaka* is another name for the monthly Śrāddha.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, (p. 165), where it is explained
as laying down the order of sequence between *Piṇḍapitṛyajña* and
*Piṇḍānvāhāryaka*, as performed by the man with the consecrated
fire;—the particle ‘*anu*’ denotes repetition;—‘*candrakṣaye*’ means ‘on
the *Amāvasyā* day.’

It is quoted in *Kālaviveka* (p. 354) as laying down *Śrāddha* to be
performed on the *Amāvasyā* day.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 321) quotes it in support of the view that all
those texts that lay down the Vaiśvadeva offering as to be done before
the *Śrāddha*, are to be taken as applying only to the *man who has set
up the Śrauta Fire* (which is what is meant by the term ‘*agnimān*’ in
the present verse);—again on p. 495, where it adds that
‘*māsānumāsikam*’ means ‘every month’; and goes on to explain that
*Piṇḍapitṛyajña* is to be performed also by the man who has not set up
the *Śrauta* Fire; so that for the man with the ‘Śrauta Fire,’ as well
as for the man with the ‘Domestic Fire,’ it is necessary to perform
*Anvādhāna, Piṇḍapitṛyajña* and *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha*,—all on the same day.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 40) quotes this verse as permitting the performance
of Śrāddha on a day on which there is *Caturdaśī* in the morning but
*Amāvasyā* for the rest of the day.

This is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 418), which remarks that the repetitive
form of the term ‘*māsānumāsikam*’ is meant to imply that the Śrāddha on
the Amāvasyā day is compulsory;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 609) to the
effect that ‘*Pitṛyajña*’ should be performed before the ‘*Śrāddha*’;—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 72,171,321 and 1064);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*
(pp. 956 and 989) to the effect that the *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha* should be
performed after *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*; it explains ‘*Piṇḍānvāhāryakam*’ as
*Piṇḍānām piṇḍapitṛyajñārthānām anu paścāt āhṛyate kṛyate iti*,’ and
calls it a name for the *Amāvasyā*

*Śrāddha*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 185), which explains
‘*Piṇḍānvāhāryakam*’ as *Pārvaṇaśrāddha*, and expounds the same as
‘*piṇḍāḥ anu brāhmaṇabhojanānantaram āhriyante asmin*’;—in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 6) as laying down *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha*;—and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, pp. 431 and 492).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Sumantu* (Aparārka, p. 418).—‘The man with the fire shall offer Śrāddha
to those to whom his father offers it.’

*Maitrāyaṇīya-pariśiṣṭa* (Do.).—‘Marriage, the birth of a son, the
Pitrya Iṣṭi, Soma-sacrifice, sacred places, and the arrival of the right
Brāhmaṇa,—these are occasions for the performance of Śrāddha by one
whose father is living.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘If the man with his father living performs Śrāddha, he
should offer it to those to whom his father offers it; if his
grandfather is alive, to those to whom the grandfather offers it; if his
father, grandfather and greatgrandfather are all alive, he shall not
offer it at all.’

*Gautama* (15.2).—‘During the later fortnight, from the fifth day
onwards, Śrāddha shall be performed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 217).—‘The Moonless day, the Aṣṭakās, the Auspicious
ceremonies, the darker fortnight, the two solstices...... (these are the
occasions for Śrāddha).’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 417).—‘The Moonless day on which the moon sets
after appearing is called *Sinīvālī*; on that day should Śrāddha be
offered by Agnihotrins; and that day on which the moon is entirely
invisible (called *Kuhū*), on that it should be offered by Brāhmaṇas
without fire and by others.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 418).—‘The man whose father is dead should offer
Śrāddha every day, also every month on the moonless day, on auspicious
occasions and also every year.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 418).—‘The twice-born man whose father has died
shall offer Śrāddha every day—be he with Fire or without Fire; also
every month and every year.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘While one’s father is living, one should avoid all
Śrāddhas; but according to some people, he should offer it to those
Pitṛs to whom his father offers it.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

122	After performing the Pitriyagna, a Brahmana who keeps a sacred fire shall offer, month by month, on the new-moon day, the funeral sacrifice (Sraddha, called) Pindanvaharyaka.
</details>
