+++
title = "123 पितॄणाम् मासिकम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The monthly śrāddha to the Pitṛs the wise call “anvāhārya;” and it should be carefully performed with such meat as has been commended.—(123)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अन्वाहार्यं** दर्शपौर्णमासयोः श्रौतयोर् दक्षिणर्त्विजाम् । यद् एतन् **मासिकं श्राद्धम्** अमावास्यायाम् एतत् **पितॄणाम्** **अन्वाहार्यम्** । यथान्वाहार्येणर्त्विजः प्रीयन्ते तद्वत् पितरः श्राद्धेन । एतेन पित्रर्थतां श्राद्धस्याह । यथाग्न्यादिदेवतार्थो दर्शादियाग एवं न श्राद्धे पितरः, किं तर्हि तदुपकारार्थम् एव श्राद्धम् । तथा च **पितॄणाम्** इति षष्ठी । केवले हि देवतात्वे चतुर्थ्याविरहायोगः । 

- पक्षे पाठान्तरम् अर्थान्तरं च "**पिण्डानां मासिकम्**" इति । 

- **अन्वाहार्यं विदुर् बुधाः** । अनेनापि पितृयज्ञवद् अवश्यकर्तव्यतोच्यते । न त्व् इदम् अङ्गम् । **तद्** एतद् **आमिषेण** मांसेन कर्तव्यम् । **प्रशस्तेन** अप्रतिषिद्धेन विसेषविहितेन वा । "द्वौ मासौ मत्स्यमांसेन" (म्ध् ३.२५८) इति यद् वक्ष्यति । अयं च मुख्यः कल्पः । तदभावे दहिघृतपयोऽपूपादि विधायिष्यते । मांसं च व्यञ्जनम्, भक्तादिभोज्यस्य । न पुनर् एतद् एव केवलं भोज्यम्, येन वक्ष्यति "गुणांश् च सूपशाकाद्यान्" (म्ध् ३.२१६), तथा "यावन्तश् चैव यैश् चान्नैः" (म्ध् ३.११४) इति । 

- <u>किं पुनः</u> श्राद्धे होमब्राह्मणभोजनपिण्डनिर्वपणादीनि कर्माणि सर्वाण्य् एव समप्रधानानि श्राद्धशब्दवाच्यानि, उत किंचिद् अङ्गम् अत्र किंचित् प्रधानम् ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । "श्राद्धं भोजयेत्" (म्ध् ३.१३७), "श्राद्धं भुक्तम् अनेन" (पाण् ५.२.८५), इति सामानाधिकरण्याद् ब्राह्मणभोजनं मुख्यं प्रतीयते ॥ ३.११३ ॥

_तथा चाह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Anvāhārya*’ is the name of the fee paid to the priests officiating at
the *Darṣa-Pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices; and the monthly *śrāddha* offered to
the Pitṛs is the ‘Anvāhārya fee’ for the Ancestors; and the sense of the
metaphor is that the Pitṛs are as much pleased on receiving the
*śrāddha-ofterings* as the Priests are on receiving the fee. This name
serves to indicate that the *śrāddha* is performed for the Pitṛs. But
the relation in which the Ancestors stand to the *śrāddha* is not the
same in which the Deities stand to the *Darśa* and other sacrifices; as
the *śrāddha* is performed for their benefit; and it is in this sense
that we have the genitive case in ‘*pitṛṛṇām* (*pitṝṇām*?)’; if the
Pitṛs were the ‘deities,’ then there would be no reason for the omitting
of the Dative affix.

Another reading giving a totally different sense is ‘*piṇḍānām
māsikam*.’

‘*The wise call Anvāhārya*’— This also indicates the obligatory
character of the *Pitṛ-yajña* (which is as necessary as the sacrificial
gift); but with this difference that it is not a mere subordinate factor
(as the sacrificial fee is).

‘*It should be performed with such meat as has been comended*’—*i.e*.,
not prohibited, or particularly recommended; as in 268, where it is said
‘with the meat of fish the Ancestors remain satisfied for two months,
etc., etc.’

This is the principal method; in the absence of meat, curds, butter,
milk, cakes, etc., shall be offered, as is going to be prescribed later
on.

The meat, however, is only the sauce for the seasoning of such food as
cooked rice and the like; it does not consti-tute a food by itself,
since the text is going to describe ‘such subsidiaries us soup and
vegetables, etc.’ (226), and also ‘on what kinds of food, etc.’ (next
verse).—(123)

The question that arises now is that the *śrāddha* consisting of the
several acts of (*a*) oblations in fire, (*b*) feeding of Brāhmaṇas,
(*c*) offering of hulls of food, and so forth,—are they all equally
principal and expressible by the name ‘*śrāddha*?’ Or, some are
principal and some secondary? The answer is that, in view of suoh
expressions as—‘one should feed Brāhmaṇas in *śrāddha*,’ ‘this man has
eaten at the *śrāddha*,’ and so forth, where ‘feeding’ and ‘*śrāddha*’
are spoken of as synonyms,—the ‘feeding of Brāhmaṇas appears to be the
principal factor.’ To the same end our Author says—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 573);—and in
*Godādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 431), which expounds the name
‘*anvāhāryam*’ as ‘*anu, paścāt*, *āhāryam kāryam*,’ and says that this
the learned call ‘*Dārśa-Śrāddha*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.16).—‘Śrāddha should be performed month by
month.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.19).—‘The first alternative is that at these
Śrāddhas the offering should consist of butter and meat.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (70.24).—\[The Pitṛs are represented as
saying\]—‘Kālaśāka, Mahāśalka, the meat of the Vārdhrīṇasa goat, and the
meat of the rhinoceros whose horn has not come out,—these we partake
of.’

*Laugākṣi* (quoted in Parāśaramādhava, p. 308)—‘The twice-born person
whose father is dead must perform Śrāddha on the moonless day every
month.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

123	The wise call the monthly funeral offering to the manes Anvaharya (to be offered after the cakes), and that must be carefully performed with the approved (sorts of) flesh (mentioned below).
</details>
