+++
title = "125 द्वौ दैवे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even though wealthy, one should feed two at the rite performed in honour of the gods, and three at that in honour of the Pitṛs; or one only at each of the two rites he should not indulge in large company.—(125)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२१९]:
     M G: prasajjeta

यद्य् अपि प्रतिज्ञातस्य वस्तुनस् तेनैव क्रमेण विशेषकथनं युक्तम्, तथापीह स्वल्पवक्तव्यत्वाद् "भोजनीया" (म्ध् ३.११४) इति प्राप्तं परित्यज्य संख्यानिर्देशो ऽनेन क्रियते । 

- देवान् उद्दिश्य **द्वौ** ब्राह्मणौ भोजयेत् । पितॄणां कृत्ये **त्रीन्** । **उभयत्र वा** दैव एकं पित्र्ये चैकम् । यद्य् अपि "पित्र्ये" इत्य् अत्र पितुर् इदम् इति पितृशब्देन देवताचोदना, तथापि पितृपितामहप्रपितामहा उद्देश्याः । तत्रैकैकस्यैकैअं भोजयेत्, न त्व् एवैकं सर्वेभ्यः, पृथक्पृथग् देवतात्वात् । उक्तं च गृह्यकरेण "न त्व् एवैकं सर्वेषाम्" (आश्ग् ४.७.४), "पिण्डैर् व्याख्यातम्" (आश्ग् ४.७.६) इति । यथैकः पिण्डः सर्वेभ्यो न निरुप्यते तथैव ब्राह्मणो ऽपि न भोज्यत इत्य् अर्थः । इहापि वक्ष्यति- "निमन्त्रयेत त्र्यवरान्" (म्ध् ३.१७७) इति । भोजनार्थम् एव तन्निमन्त्रणम्, नादृष्टार्थम् । अतश् च पितृकृत्ये त्रींस् त्रीन् इति द्रष्टव्यम् । तथा चाह- "न चावरान् भोजयेत्" इति (च्ड़्। ग्ध् १५.७) । एवं च कृत्वा "एकैकम् अपि विद्वांसम्" (म्ध् ३.११९) इत्य् एतद् अप्य् एवम् एव द्रष्टव्यम्-[^२२०] एकैकस्यैकैकम् इति । अपि च नैवात्रैकैकम् उभयत्रेत्य् एतद् विधीयते, विस्तरप्रतिषेधर्थो ऽयम् अनुवादः । यथा "विषं भक्षय, मा चास्य गृहे भुङ्क्ष्व" इति । 


[^२२०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: draṣṭavyam

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं "द्वौ दैवे" इत्य् एषो ऽपि विधिर् न स्याद् अस्याप्य् अन्यार्थतयोपपत्तेः । अथायं विधिर् अप्राप्तत्वाद् एकैकम् इत्य् एषो ऽपि कस्मान् न भवति । 

- <u>अत्राह</u> । मा भूद् द्वयोर् एको ऽपि विधिः । 

- <u>कुतस्</u> तर्हि संख्यावगमः ।

- "निमन्त्रयेत त्र्यवरान्" इति (म्ध् ३.१७७) ।

- <u>ननु</u> तत्र दैवग्रहणं नास्ति ।

- <u>स्मृत्यन्तरात्</u> तर्हि संख्यावगमः- "अयुजो वा यथोत्साहम्" (ग्ध् १५.७–८) इति, "युग्मान् दैवे" (य्ध् १.२२६) इति । 

- यदि वायं संख्याविधिः स्याद् विस्तरप्राप्त्यभावात् प्रतिषेधो ऽनर्थकः । तस्माद् यावद्भिर् ब्राह्मणैर् भोजितैर् विस्तरे ये दोषास् ते न भवन्ति ताद्वन्तो[^२२१] भोजनीयाः ।[^२२२] पित्र्ये ऽयुग्माः दैवे तु द्वाव् एव । अतिसमृद्धो ऽप्य् अत्यर्थम् आढ्यो ऽपि । न प्रवर्तेत विस्तरे । न चायम् अदृष्टार्थो विस्तरप्रतिषेधः ॥ ३.११५ ॥


[^२२२]:
     G 1st ed. adds: atrāha | mā bhūd dvayor eko 'pi tāvanto bhojanīyāḥ |


[^२२१]:
     G 1st ed.: tādvad

_किं तर्हि ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though as a rule each subject should be propounded in the same order in
which it has been mentioned before,—and according to this the *persons
to be fed* should have been described first,—yet the present verse
describes their *number* first; because there is very little to be said
on this point.

With reference to the gods, one should feed two Brāhmaṇas, and at the
rite performed in honour of the Pitṛs he should feed three; ‘*or one at
each of the two*’—*i.e*., one at the rite in honour of the Gods and one
at that in honour of the Pitṛs.

Though the word used in the Text is ‘*pitṛ*,’ which shows that the
entity to whom the offering is to be made is the *Father*, yet, as a
matter of fact, the offering is to be made to the Father, grandfather
and great-grandfather. Hence, at the *śrāddha*, one should food one
Brāhmaṇa for each of these three,—and not one only for all three;
because each of them constitutes a distinct ‘recipient of offering.’
Says the author of the *Gṛhyasūtra* (Āśvnlāyana, 4. 7.2-4)—‘Not only one
for all; it has been explained by means of the balls;’ that is, just as
only one ball is not offered to all, so only one Brāhmaṇa should not be
fed for all. Here also the author will say later on—‘he should invite at
least three;’ and the invitation there spoken of is for the purpose of
feeding them, and not for the purpose of any merely transcendental
result. It is for this reason that at the rite in honour of ancestors
one should feed three,—that is, three times three, specially as it has
been declared that ‘one should not feed the least number.’ This same
explanation *applies also to what is said below (in 129*) regarding the
feeding ‘even one learned person at each;’ which means that one for each
of the three ancestors.

Further, the words ‘*or only one at each of the two*’ does not contain
an injunction; it is only a reiteration made for the propose of
introducing the prohibition of ‘large company;’ just as we have in the
statement—‘eat poison, do not eat in his house.’

“If that be so, then the assertion ‘he should feed two at the rite in
honour of the gods’ also may not be an injunction; as this also could be
explained as subservient to something else. If, however, this be
regarded as an Injunction, on the ground that what it says is not
knowable from any other source,—then, why cannot the statement ‘one at
each’ also be an Injunction?”

The answer to this is that neither of the two statements may be regarded
as an Injunction.

“Whence, then, could we know the number (to be fed)?”

From the assertion—‘he should invite at least three.’

“But in that passage there is no mention of the rite in honour of the
gods.”

Well, in that case, we can learn the number from another *Smṛti*:—‘an
odd number, according to one’s enthusiasm,’ ‘an even number at the rite
in honour of the gods’ (Yājñavalkya, *ācāra*, 227).

Further, if the present verse contained an Injunction of the number to
be fed, then, since there would be no possibility of any idea arising
regarding the ‘large company,’ the prohibition of it would be absolutely
uncalled for.

From all this it follows that only so many Brāhmaṇas should be fed, by
feeding whom one would not fall into those difficulties that might arise
from the feeding of too many men. That is, at the rite in honour of the
ancestors, an odd number, and at that in honour of the gods, only two.

Even when the man is extremely wealthy,—very rich,—‘*he should, not
indulge in large company*.’—(125)

This prohibition of feeding a very large number is not with a view to
any transcendental result. In fact—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Buhler is not quite fair to Medhātithi when he says that he takes the
first part of the verse in a peculiar manner, “one must feed two
Brāhmaṇas at the offering to the gods and three for each ancestor (or
nine in all) at the offering to the manes”. This is not quite what
Medhātithi takes the text *to mean*; what he mentions is what ought to
be done, in consideration of the other texts that he quotes.

This verse is quoted in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 511);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 24b);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 159 and
114);—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 94), which explains ‘*ubhayatra*’
as ‘one in *Devakṛtya* and one in *Pitṛkṛtya*.’

The first quarter of this verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra,
p. 698) as laying down the proportion of Brāhmaṇas to be fed at the two
sorts of rites. If five Brāhmaṇas are to be fed, two should be fed in
connection with the offering to the Gods and three in connection with
that to the *Pitṛs*.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 592) quotes the verse, and explains that the
forbidding of the feeding of a large company is based on the fear that
if a large number of people are invited at a time or place not quite
suited for the purpose, there may be many defects that, would go to
vitiate the entire rite.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 287) quotes this verse;—also *Aparārka* (p. 430),
which adds that the term ‘*Pitṛ*’ here includes the maternal grandfather
and all those who have been declared to be ‘deities’ (for the
Śrāddha);—again on p. 463, where it adds that it is meant to eulogise
the lesser number, and not to prohibit large numbers; if it meant the
latter, it would be wrong to feed a large number of men, which is
actually enjoined by other *Smṛtis*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.24).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Gautama* (15.8, 21).—‘At least nine; or an odd number; or any number,
in accordance with his zeal; (the man invited) should be possessed of
excellent qualities.’

*Viṣṇu* (73, 3-4).—‘In connection with the offering to the gods one
should feed two men, who should be facing the east; and in connection
with the offering to Pitṛs, three men, who should he facing the north;
or one in connection with each of the two offerings.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.227-229).—‘At the offering to gods, an even number, and
at that to Pitṛs, an odd number of Brāhmaṇas should be invited, to the
best of one’s capacity. Two men facing the east, in connection with the
offering to the gods; three facing the north, in connection with the
offering to Pitṛs; or one in connection with each of the two offerings;
so also in the case of the offering to the maternal grand-fathers.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (4.2).—‘Brāhmaṇas endowed with learning and
character and good conduct, invited in time, bathed and purified, should
be made to face the north, as if they were Pitṛs, either one or two or
three for each one of the Pitṛs; but never only one for all.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.9.21).—\[The same as Manu.\]

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 698).—‘One shall invite seven or five
or two Brāhmaṇas learned in the Veda.’

*Śaunaka* (Do.).—‘Two for each Pitṛ; one for each; or three for each.’

*Brahmāṇḍa-purāṇa* (Do., p. 699).—‘Even though he has the capacity, he
should feed less than nine, never more; so say those who perceive
difficulties in feeding a large number,’

*Vṛddha-Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘At the rite in honour of Pitṛs and gods, one
shall feed one or two or three on behalf of each; due honour and
observance of right time and place cannot be fulfilled if there is an
excess.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Or one may feed a single Brāhmaṇa, who is the
*sanctifier of company*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 461).—‘Or, one may feed a single Brāhmaṇa,
thoroughly versed in the Veda.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

125	One must feed two (Brahmanas) at the offering to the gods, and three at the offering to the manes, or one only on either occasion; even a very wealthy man shall not be anxious (to entertain) a large company.
</details>
