+++
title = "130 दूराद् एव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From far off one should examine the Brāhmaṇa thoroughly versed in the Veda; such a one is the proper channel for offerings to gods and Pitṛ and in the matter of gifts he has been declared to be the guest.—(130)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

न **वेदपरग** इत्य् एव भोजयितव्यः । किं तर्हि **दूरात् परीक्षेत** निपुणतो मातापितृवंशद्वयपरिशुद्धिज्ञानम् । यथोक्तम् "ये मातृतः पितृतश् च दशपूरुषम् समनुष्ठितविद्यातपोभ्यां पुण्यैश् च कर्मभिः येषाम् उभयतो ब्राह्मण्यं निर्णयेयुः" इत्य् एषा दूरात् परीक्षा । तथा तत्त्वतो ऽध्ययनविज्ञानकर्मानुष्ठानवेदनं च । वेदस्य पारः समाप्तिः तं गतो[^२२९] **वेदपरगः** । न वेदसंहितां ब्राह्मणमात्रं वा पठन्न् अर्हो भवति । अस्माद् एव दर्शनात् श्रोत्रियशब्देन वेदैकदेशम् अप्य् अधीयान उच्यत इति गम्यते । **तीर्थं तद् धव्यकव्यानाम्** । तीर्थम् इव तीर्थं येनोदकं ग्रहीतुम् अवतरन्ति तत् तीर्थम् । तेन यथा मार्गेणोदकार्थिनो गच्छन्त उदकं लभन्ते एवं तादृशेन ब्राह्मणेन हव्यकव्यानि पितॄन् गच्चन्तीति प्रशंसा । अन्यस्मिन्न् अपि इष्टापूर्तदानेन ब्राह्मणो **ऽतिथिः**-[^२३०] यथातिथये स्वयम् उपस्थिताय निर्विचिक्त्सं दीयते, दत्तं महाफलम्, एवम् ईदृशाय ब्राह्मणाय हव्यकव्ये निर्विचिकित्सं दातव्ये, महाफले भवतः ॥ ३.१२० ॥


[^२३०]:
     M G: yathātithir


[^२२९]:
     M G 1st ed.: pāragaḥ samāptigaḥ vedaparagaḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One is not to be fed simply because he is thoroughly versed in the Veda;
in fact, he should be examined ‘*from far off*;’ *i.e*., one should
carefully ascertain the purity of his father’s and mother’s families. It
has been declared that persons should be regarded as real Brāhmaṇaa on
both sides, only when it is found that everyone of their ancestors on
the father’s and on the mother’s side up to ten degrees were
accomplished in learning and austerities and their acts were virtuous;
this is what constitutes ‘examination from far off;’ similarly, the
man’s own learning and knowledge of practical details should be
ascertained.

‘*Vedapāragaḥ*’—he who has gone to the end of the Veda; *i.e*., one does
not become respected by reading the *Saṃhitā* only, or the *Brāhmaṇa*
only. Because we find this term used here, we conclude that the term
‘*śrotriya*’ is applied to one who may have learnt only a portion of the
Veda.

‘*Such a one is the channel for offerings to gods and
Pitṛs*;’—‘*channel*’ means *like a channel*. The ‘channel’ is that
whereby people descend to the water; hence what is meant by the metaphor
is the eulogium that ‘just as people seeking water get it only if they
go to it by the right channel, similarly, the offerings reach the gods
and ancestors only through the aforesaid *Brāhmaṇa*.’

In connection with gifts and charities also the Brāhmaṇa is the ‘guest.’
To the guest that arrives by himself, gifts are offered freely, and thus
given, they bring about great results; and, in the same manner, to the
said Brāhmaṇa the offerings to gods and ancestors should be given
freely; and when thus given, they become conducive to great
results.—(130)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 356), which explains
‘*dūrāt parīkṣā*’ as ‘investigation regarding his ancestors and
character’; and ‘*pradāne*’ as ‘in the matter of other gifts also’ he
should be honoured like a guest;—in *Aparārka*, (p. 437), which explains
‘*dūrāt parīkṣā*’ as ‘investigation regarding his father and several
degrees of ancestors,’—‘*tīrtham*’ as ‘the way for the running of
water,’ the implication being ‘just as water runs smoothly along its
path, so do the offerings easily reach the Pitṛs, through the qualified
Brāhmaṇas’;—the man is called ‘*atithi*’ in the sense that he is of
immense help to the Householder;—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 34),
which explains ‘*dūrāt*’ as ‘in regard to their remote ancestry,’ and
‘*tīrtha*’ as ‘fit recipient.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (72.2).—‘At the offering to Pitṛs one should examine the
Brāhmaṇas with care.’

*Atri-saṃhitā* (357).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should be carefully examined,
specially at the time of the Śrāddha.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

130	Let him make inquiries even regarding the remote (ancestors of) a Brahmana who has studied an entire (recension of the) Veda; (if descended from a virtuous race) such a man is a worthy recipient of gifts (consisting) of food offered to the gods or to the manes, he is declared (to procure as great rewards as) a guest (atithi).
</details>
