+++
title = "133 यावतो ग्रसते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As many mouthfuls as the person ignorant of the Veda swallows out of the offerings to gods and Pitṛs, so many flaming spikes, spears and iron-balls does the man swallow after death.—(133)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि श्राद्धप्रकरणे वाक्याद् भोक्तुर् अयं दोषानुवादः । तथा चोक्तम्-

- तस्माद् अविद्वान् बिभियाद् यस्मात् तस्मात् प्रतिग्रहात् । इति । (म्ध् ४.१९१)

**शूलर्ष्ट्ययो** आयुधविशेषाः[^२३७], **अयोगुडः**[^२३८] आयसः पिण्डः । यदर्थं श्राद्दम् आरब्धं स दीप्तान् तप्तायःपिण्डान् यमपुरुषैर् आश्यते[^२३९] । 


[^२३९]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: yadarthaṃ śrāddam ārabdhaṃ sa dīptān taptāyaḥpiṇḍān yamapuruṣair āśyate | G 2nd ed. places it after doṣo na bhoktuḥ.


[^२३८]:
     M G: ayolaguḍaḥ


[^२३७]:
     M G: āyudhaviśeṣe

- व्यासदर्शनात् तु भोजयितुर् अयं दोषो न भोक्तुः । न पितॄणां न तावन् मृतानाम् अन्यकृतेन प्रतिषेधातिक्रमेण दोषसंबन्धो युक्तः, कृताभ्यागमादिदोषापत्तेः । यदि हि पुत्रेण तादृशो ब्राह्मणो भोजितः को ऽपराधो मृतानाम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चोपकारो ऽपि पुत्रकृतः पितॄणाम् अनेन न्यायेन न प्राप्नोति । न[^२४०] प्राप्नुयाद् यदि तादर्थ्येन श्राद्धादि नोदितं स्यात् । इह तु नास्ति चोदना, पितुर् उपकारकामेनैवं कर्तव्यम्[^२४१], श्येनवत् । यत् तु **तावतो ग्रसते प्रेतः** इति तद् भोजयितृसंबन्धे ऽप्य् उपपद्यते । "यस्य ब्राह्मण ईदृशः श्राद्धं भुङ्क्ते स इदं फलम् आप्नोति" इति युक्तः संबन्धः । प्राकरणिकश् चायम् अविद्वद्भोजनप्रतिषेधः । तदतिक्रमणे कर्मवैगुण्यम्, तद्वैगुण्ये च श्राद्धाधिकारान् निवृत्तिर् एव दोषः । पितॄणां श्राद्धोपकाराल् लाभः । ततो ऽपि विध्यतिक्रमे पुत्रस्य युक्तः प्रत्यवायः । किं तर्हि तद् भगवतो व्यासस्य वचनम्-


[^२४१]:
     M G add: syāt


[^२४०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na

- ग्रसते यावतः पिण्डान् यस्य वै हविषो ऽविदः ।

- ग्रसते तावतः शूलान् गत्वा वैवस्वतक्षयम् ॥ 

पाठान्तरं "प्रेत्य" इति । भोक्तुर् एव प्रेत्यता । नाविदुषा दैवपित्र्ययोर् भोक्तव्यम्[^२४२] ॥ ३.१२३ ॥


[^२४२]:
     M G place this at the end of the previous verse.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though it is the *śrāddha* that forms the subject-matter of the
present context, yet the present verse describes the evil results
occurring to the eater; it is to this effect that it has been declared
that ‘for this reason should the ignorant person fear the acceptance of
gifts from this and that person.’

‘*Spikes and spears*’ are the names of particular weapons. Such a person
is made by the attendants of the Lord of Death to eat red-hot
iron-balls.

According to Vyāsa’s view, the evil result accrues to the person
offering the focal, and not to the eater, nor to the ancestors. Because
it cannot be right to connect the dead ancestors with the evil arising
from the disobeying, by another person, of the prohibition (of the
feeding ignorant persons); as in that case, there would be the absurdity
of a man suffering what he has not earned. If an ignorant person has
been fed by the *son*, what fault is there of his dead ancestors?

“But by this same reasoning the benefit also of the *śrāddha* should not
accrue to the ancestors.”

It would certainly not accrue to them, if the śrāddha-offering had not
been distinctly enjoined as being for their benefit. In the present case
(of feeding Brāhmaṇas), however, there is no such injunction as that
‘this should be done by one who desires to confer a benefit on one’s
son,’ as there is in the case of the *Śyena* sacrifice. Then, as regards
the words of the present text, they can fit in also with the person
ottering the food; the construction in this case being—‘that man, at
whose performance of the *śrāddha* such a person eats, obtains such and
such a result.’ What forms the subject-matter of the present context is
the prohibition of the feeding of ignorant persons; and the disregarding
of this prohibition would render the rite defective; and this defect in
the Kite would lead to the evil result that the man would no longer be
entitled to the performance of that rite \[aud this would pertain to the
*giver*, not *eater*, of the food\]; and since the ancestors derive
benefit from the *śrāddha*, for this reason also the transgressing of
its injunction should involve guilt on the part of the son.

“What are the precise words of Vyāsa (on this subject)?”

\[They are\]—‘As many mouthfuls as an ignorant person swallows out of a
man’s offerings, so many spikes does he swallow on going to the abode of
Death.’

In place of ‘*preto*’ some people read ‘*pretya*;’ where also the term
‘having died’ pertains to the *eater*; and the sense of the text is that
‘the ignorant mail shall not eat of the offerings made to gods and
ancestors.’—(133)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to Nārāyaṇa the punishment here mentioned falls on the
*eater*.—Medhātithi mentions both explanations.

For ‘*guḍān*’ Nandana reads ‘*hulān*’ and explains it as ‘double-edged
sword.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 449), which explains ‘*śūlam*’
and ‘*ṛṣti*’ as particular weapons,—and ‘*ayoguḍa*’ as ‘an
iron-ball’;—and *in Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 401).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 449).—‘He in whose family there has been a
cessation of the Veda and the sacrificial altar for three generations is
a had Brāhmaṇa.’

*Vyāsa*.—‘As many morsels the man ignorant of the Veda swallows out of
the offerings made by a man so many darts does he swallow in the abode
of Death.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 449).—‘Those countries where what should be
eaten by the learned is eaten by the illiterate are beset by drought and
great dangers beset them.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘Even those born of noble families and endowed with
learning,—if they be of base conduct and addicted to wicked deeds,—they
are even regarded as demons. Those addicted to the killing of birds,
fish and deer, serpents and tortoise and other animals are all *Bad
Brāhmaṇas*. Who serves a Śūdra, who is supported by the King, the
village-sacrificer, those living by killing and capturing—these six are
*Low Brāhmaṇas*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

133	As many mouthfuls as an ignorant man swallows at a sacrifice to the gods or to the manes, so many red-hot spikes, spears, and iron balls must (the giver of the repast) swallow after death.
</details>
