+++
title = "145 यत्नेन भोजयेच्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With great care one should feed at a Śrāddha the adherent of the Ṛgveda who is thoroughly versed in his Veda, or the adherent of the Yajurveda who has finished the entire recensional text, or the adherent of the Sāmaveda who has reached the end of it.—(145).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वेदपारगशाखान्तगसमाप्तिकाः** शब्दा एकार्थाः समन्त्रब्राह्मनिकायाः कृत्स्नायाः शाखाया अध्येतॄन् आचक्षते । न मन्त्रसंहिताया नापि ब्राह्मणस्य, तदेकदेशस्य वा । वेदैकशाखाध्यायिनो ऽपि श्रोत्रिया उच्यन्ते । अतस् तन्निवृत्त्यर्थम् उक्तं श्रोत्रियाय देयम् इति । श्रोत्रियश् च वेदाध्यायी । वेदशब्दश् च समन्त्रब्राह्मणिकां शाखाम् आचष्टे । तदेकदेशम् अपि या कृत्स्नशाखाध्यायी[^२६०] कथं गृह्येतेत्य् एवमर्थम् इदम् ।


[^२६०]:
     M G: kṛtsnaśākhā tatrādhyāyī

- <u>ननु</u> चाश्रमिणो भोजनीया इत्य् उक्तम् । तत्रानधीतसकलस्वाध्यायानां नैव गार्हस्थ्याद्याश्रमसंभवः । एवं ह्य् उक्तम् "वेदः कृत्स्नो ऽधिगन्तव्यः" (म्ध् २.१६५) इति । 

- <u>ब्रह्मचारिणस्</u> तर्हि प्रक्रान्तवेदाध्ययनस्य असमाप्तिगस्यापि स्यात् । वेदपारगशाखान्तगसमाप्तिकशब्दैर् एकार्थैः कार्त्स्न्यं सर्वैर् एव प्रतिपाद्यते । 

- एकेनैव सिद्धे वृत्तानुरोधान् नानारूपैकार्थानेकशब्दोच्चारणम् । वेदानां पारं गच्छति । शाखाया अन्तःसमाप्तिर् अस्यास्तीति **समाप्तिकः** । **अध्वर्युर्** यजुर्वेदशाखाध्यायी, नायम् ऋत्विग् विशेषवचनो ऽध्वर्युशब्दः । अध्वर्यवः प्रवचनम् उच्यते । तदध्ययनसंबन्धात् पुरुषो ऽध्वर्युः । **छन्दोगः** सामवेदाध्यायी । स्मृत्यन्तरे त्रिसाहस्रविद्यः **समाप्तिक** उक्तः । तत्र सहस्रशब्दः सहस्रगीतिसंबन्धात् सामवेदे वर्तते, तस्य इमाः साहस्र्यस् तिस्रः साहस्र्यः विद्या यस्य त्रिसाहस्रविद्यः । ताण्डवमौक्तिक्यं सामगानाम् इति सहस्रवर्त्मनः सामवेदस्य तस्य तिस्रो विद्याः । दशतयी चतुःषष्टि ब्राह्मणं च बाह्वृच्यम् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आथर्वणिकनिषेधार्थम् इदं श्लोकम् मन्यन्ते । कार्त्स्न्याद् विवक्षायाम् एतद् एवावक्ष्यत्-

- अधीते वेदशाखां यः कृत्स्नां तं भोजयेद् द्विजम् । इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाथर्वणिकनिषेधे ऽप्य् एतत्समानम् । तत्रापि शक्यम् एवं वक्तुं तन्निषेधे प्रायेण "न भोज्य आथर्वणिकः" इत्य् एवम् एवावक्ष्यत् । स्वशब्देन निषेधप्रतिपत्तिर् लाघवं च । 

- <u>नैतद्</u> एवम् । किम् अन्यविधानेनान्यनिषेधो ऽवगम्यते स्वशब्देन वा निषेधः । विचित्रा धर्मोपदेशस्य कृतिर् मनोः ॥ ३.१३५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The three terms—‘*thoroughly versed in the Veda*,’ ‘*who has finished
the entire recesional text*’ and ‘*who has reached the end of it*’—are
synonymous; everyone of them denotes *persons who have learnt the whole
recensional text, including the Mantra as well as the Brāhmaṇa*; not
those who have learnt either the *Mantra-text* alone or the *Brāhmaṇa-*
text alone, or only a portion of these. The name ‘*śrotriya*,’ ‘learned
in the Veda,’ is Applied, to even those who have learnt only a part of
the Veda; hence the three terms in the present verse have been used for
the purpose of excluding the mere ‘*śrotriya*.’ In regard to this
latter, it has been said (in 128) that ‘the offering should be given to
the *śrotriya*;’ the term ‘*śrotriya*’ means ‘one learned in the
*Veda*;’ and the term ‘*veda*’ denotes the entire recensional text,
including the *Mantra* and the *Brāhmaṇa*, as also a part of these.
Consequently, for the purpose of referring to one who has learnt the
*entire* ṛecensional text, the Text 1ms used the terms in question.

“It has been laid down above (134-135) that one shall feed only such
persons as belong to one or the other *stage*; and until one has learnt
the entire Vedic text, it is not possible for one to cuter upon the
state of the Householder; as it has been asserted that ‘the entire Veda
should be learnt’ (2.165).”

But even so, it would he open to one to feed the Student who has begun
to learn the Veda,—even before he has finished it. Hence all the three
synonymous terms—‘thoroughly versed in the Veda,’ ‘who has finished the
entire recensional text,’ and ‘who has reached the end of it’—indicate
that the *whole* Veda should have been learnt.

Though only one of these words would have sufficed for the purpose, yet
the Author has made use of several forms of the same expression in view
of metrical exigencies.

‘*Vedapāragah*,’ ‘*Thoroughly versed in the Veda*,’—who has *gone
through* the entire Veda.

‘*Śākhāntagaḥ*’ ‘*who has finished the entire recensional text*’— the
end of the recensional text.

‘*Samāptikaḥ*,’—‘who has reached the end of it.’

‘*Adhvaryu*,’ ‘*adherent of the Yajurveda*’—one who has studied the
Yajurveda; this term is not used here as the name of one of the
principal sacrificial priests. ‘*Ādhvargava*’ is the name given to the
act of reciting; hence the person connected with this act is called
‘*Adhvaryu*.’

‘*Chāndoga*,’ ‘*adherent of the Sāmaveda*,’—one who studies the
Sāmaveda.

In another *Smṛti*, it is the person who has learnt the ‘three
thousands’ that has been called ‘*samāptika*;’ and the term ‘thousand’
here denotes the *Sāmaveda*, by reason of its being related to a
thousand musical forms.; and one. whose learning consists of *three* of
these ‘*thousand*’ is ‘one who has learnt the three thousands;’ the
*three* forms being (I) the

‘*Tāṇḍava*’ (Texts relating to Dancing), (2) the ‘*Aukthikya*’ (Texts
relating to the *Ukthas*) and (2) the ‘*Sāmagāna*’ (the singing of Sāmu
verses); these are the three ‘sciences’ of the Sāmaveda, of which there
are a thousand recensions.

The ‘*Ṛgveda*’ stands for the Saṃhitā text of ten *Maṇḍalas* divided
into sixty-four *adhyāyas* and the Brāhmaṇa.

Others have explained this verse as excluding the adherents of the
Atharva Veda from being fed. (They argue that) if the author had
intended to include all the Vedas, he would have simply said—‘one should
feed that Brāhmaṇa who has learnt the entire recensional text of the
Veda.’

“The same argument might be urged against the verse being taken as
excluding the adherent of the Atharva Veda: if this exclusion had been
intended, the Author could have simply said—‘the adherent of the Atharva
Veda shall not be fed.’ Such a statement would be very much simpler and
a more direct way of laying down the exclusion.”

There is no force in this; as Munu’s way of teaching Dharma is diverse:
sometimes he leaves the negation to be implied by means of an
affirmation, and at others he puts the negation directly in its own
words.—(145).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 284);—and in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 382).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (99-100).—\[After reproducing Manu 145, it adds the
following.\]—‘At the Śrāddha one shall feed the Sāmavedin; at the
Vaiśvadeva offering, the Ṛgvedin; at the Pacificatory rite, the
Yajurvedin; and at the Harder rites, the Atharvavedin.’

*Laghvāśvalāyana* (24.15).—‘At the Śrāddha, one should invite such
Ṛgvedin Brāhmaṇas as are learned in the Veda; in the absence of them,
those learned in the other Vedas.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

145	Let him (take) pains (to) feed at a Sraddha an adherent of the Rig-veda who has studied one entire (recension of that) Veda, or a follower of the Yagur-veda who has finished one Sakha, or a singer of Samans who (likewise) has completed (the study of an entire recension).
</details>
