+++
title = "150 ये स्तेन-पतित-क्लीबा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Manu has declared those Brāhmaṇas undeserving of (receiving) the offerings to gods and Pitṛs who are thieves, outcasts and eunuchs, as also those that have the behaviour of atheists.—(150)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्तेनः** चौरः । **पतितः** पञ्चानां महापातकानाम् अन्यतमस्य कर्ता । **क्लीबो** नपुंसकः उभयव्यञ्जनो वातरेताः षण्ढश् च । **नास्तिका** लोकायतिकादयः । नास्ति दत्तं नास्ति हुतं नास्ति परलोक इति ये स्थितप्रज्ञास् तेषां वृत्तिर् आचारः अश्रद्दधानता नास्तिकवृत्तिर् येषां ते **नास्तिकवृत्तयः** । उत्तरपदलोपीसमासः । नास्तिका इत्य् एव सिद्धे वृत्तिपदसमाश्रयणं[^२६६] श्लोकपूरणार्थम् । अथ वा नास्तिकेभ्यो वृत्तिर् जीवनं येषां त एवम् उच्यन्ते । **तान् हव्यकव्ययोर्** दैवे पित्र्ये च **अनर्हान् मनुर् अब्रवीत्** । प्रतिषेधादरार्थं[^२६७] मनुग्रहणम्, सर्वधर्माणां मनुनोक्तत्वात् ॥ ३.१४० ॥


[^२६७]:
     M G: manupratiṣedhā-


[^२६६]:
     M G: vṛttidvaya-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Thieves*’—stealers.

‘*Outcast*’—one who commits any one of the five ‘great sins.’

‘*Eunuch*’— emasculate, having the marks of both man and woman,
unvirile, impotent.

‘*Atheists*’—Materialists and others; those whose firm conviction is
that ‘gifts are nothing, oblations are nothing, there is no other world
the behaviour of those is unbelief; ‘those whose behaviour is like the
behaviour of atheists’ are called ‘having the behaviour of
atheists,’—this being an instance of the compound that drops its last
term. The word ‘atheist’ by itself would be sufficient; the term
‘behaviour’ has been introduced for the purpose of filling up the metre.

Or, the term ‘*nāstikavṛttayaḥ*’ may be taken to mean ‘those who derive
their livelihood from atheists.’

These Manu has declared to be undeserving of the offerings made at the
rites performed in honour of gods and Pitṛs.

The name of ‘Manu’ has been added for the purpose of lending force to
the prohibition; as, in reality, all duties have been described by
Manu.—(150)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 687) among others,
enumerating persons who should not be invited at *Śrāddhas*; it adds (on
688) the notes that—the ‘thief’ meant here is one who steals the
belongings of others than the Brāhmaṇas, the stealer of the latter’s
goods being included under ‘outcastes’,——‘*nāstikavṛtti*’ is one who
derives his livelihood from one who denies that there are any rewards
for acts in the other world;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 447), which explains
the ‘*nāstika*’ as ‘one who holds the opinion that there is nothing that
is *divine*,’ and the ‘*nāstikavṛtti*’ as ‘he who makes a living by
expounding and writing on the works of such unbelievers.’

It is quoted also in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 480);—and in
‘*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 9a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.150-166)  
**

*Gautama* (15.15-18).—‘One shall not feed at Śrāddha one who is a thief,
an eunuch, an out-cast, a heretic, or who behaves like a heretic, the
murderer of the hero, one whose wife dallies with another person (or who
makes love to his brother’s widow, or who has married a girl before the
marriage of her elder sister), who officiates at sacrifices performed by
women or by village communities, who keeps goats, who commits arson, who
drinks wine, who is censorious, who has perjured himself, who is a
conjuror, who permits his wife’s paramour to live in the house, who eats
the food of an adulterer’s son, who sells Soma, who has burnt a house,
who is a poisoner, who has broken the vows of continence, who is the
servant of a company, who has intercourse with women with whom
intercourse is prohibited, who is cruel, who has been superseded, in
marriage, by his younger brother, who has superseded, in marriage, his
elder brother, who is a pledgee or a pledger, who is bald-headed, or
with deformed nails or black teeth, who suffers from leucoderma, who is
the son of a remarried woman, who keeps a gambling house, who does not
repeat mantras, who is the servant of the king, the Prātirūpika (whose
profession is the assuming of disguises), who has married a Śūdra woman,
who neglects the great sacrifices, who is leprous, who makes a living by
money-lending, who trades, who makes a living by arts and crafts, or who
is addicted to playing on musical instruments or to dancing and
singing;—also those who have separated from their father against his
wish.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.15).—‘Avoiding the emaciated, one who is suffering from
leucoderma, the eunuch, the blind, one who has black teeth, the leprous
and one who has deformed nails.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.222-224).—‘The following have been deprecated: the
invalid, one deficient in his limbs, one with superfluous limbs, the
one-eyed, the son of a re-married woman, one who has broken his vows of
continence, one born of his unwidowed mother’s paramour, one born of his
widowed mother’s paramour, who has deformed nails, or black teeth, who
teaches for a stipulated fee, the eunuch, the defiler of virgins, who is
accused of sins, who injures a friend, the traitor, the Soma-seller, who
has superseded his elder brother in marriage, who has abandoned the
mother or the father or the preceptor, one who eats the food of the
adulterer’s son, the son of a Śūdra, the husband of a girl who had
another husband, the thief, one whose conduct is wicked.’

*Viṣṇu* (82.4-29).—‘Those who offer sacrifices for many persons, or for
village-communities, those who have abandoned the mother, the father,
the preceptor, the Fires or Vedic Study, temple-attendants, healers,
servants of the king, professional teachers, those taught by
professional teachers, those associating with outcasts, those whose
behaviour is cat-like (hypocritical), those who quarrel with their
father, those in the habit of performing on other days those rites that
should he performed on fixed days, informers, astrologers, those
supported by food given by Śūdras, those engaged in evil professions.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.90, 6, etc.).—‘He who has married before his elder
brother, who is suffering from skin-diseases, who violates his
preceptor’s bed; the keeper of a gambling house, one who has helped in
abortions, the consumptive, who tends cattle, who neglects the great
sacrifices, who serves the village, the usurer, the singer, who sells
all things, who has burnt houses, the poisoner, who eats the adulterer’s
food, the seller of Soma, the palmist, the servant; of the king, who
deals in oils, the forgerer, who has separated from his father, he who
permits his wife’s paramour to live in the house, who is accused of
crimes, the thief, who makes his living by arts and crafts; one who
performs on stray days ceremonies laid down as to he performed on
specified days, the back-biter, who injures his friend, the adulterer,
who teaches persons not keeping the observances, one who makes a living
by arms, who wanders about with dogs, and one who has been bitten by a
dog.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.17.21).—‘Who is suffering from leucoderma,
bald-headed, adulterer, the son of one who makes a living by arms, one
born of a Brāhmaṇa mother and a Śūdra father;—if these are fed at the
Śrāddha, they defile the line.’

*Atri-Saṃhitā* (347-348).—‘The servant, the tawny, the one-eyed, one
suffering from leucoderma, the invalid, whose skin is diseased, one
whose hair has fallen off, one suffering from jaundice, one who wears
matted locks, who carries loads, who is cruel, who has two wives, who
has a Śūdra wife, who foments quarrels and one who causes much
suffering.’

*Bṛhad- Yama-Smṛti* (35, 38).—‘Possessed of evil features, the eunuch, a
heretic, decrier of the Veda, one ever hankering after gifts, who is
addicted to begging and is engrossed in objects of sense.’

*Prajāpati-Smṛti* (84, 90).—‘The husband of a girl who has had a husband
before, the thief, whoso conduct is reprehensible,—these are to be
avoided. One’s ancestors fly away if they see a buffalo-keeper at the
Śrāddha.’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 689).—‘The man who makes a living for
three years by worshipping gods, is called the *Devalaka*, despised at
all offerings to Gods and Pitṛs; he is to be regarded as unfit for
company at all functions.’

*Kaśyapa* (Aparārka, p. 118).—‘Enemies, those who betray trusts, who are
deficient in limbs, astrologers,—these Brāhmaṇas should be avoided at
all functions; the one-eyed, the leprous, the eunuch, the skin-less, the
hair-less,—these should never be mixed up at Śrāddha, with those versed
in the Veda.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 119).—‘Perjuror, impotent, wife-controlled,
dam-piercer, keeper of musical time, professional actor, teacher of
false religion, professional beggar, who has incurred the liability of
expiatory rites, roguish, foolhardy, fowler, gambler, atheist,
back-biter, wicked, etc., etc.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

150	Manu has declared that those Brahmanas who are thieves, outcasts, eunuchs, or atheists are unworthy (to partake) of oblations to the gods and manes.
</details>
