+++
title = "151 जटिलञ् चाऽनधीयानम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should not feed, at a Śrāddha, one with braided hair, who is not learned, one who is hairless, the gambler, and those who sacrifice for hosts.—(151)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**जटिलो** ब्रह्मचारी, तस्य ह्य् अयं केशविशेषः पाक्षिको विहितो "मुण्डो वा जटिलो वा स्यात्" (म्ध् २.२१९) इति । उपलक्षणं च जटा ब्रह्मचारिणस् ततो मुण्डो ऽपि प्रतिषिध्यते । तस्य **चानधीयानस्य** प्रतिषेधः ।

- <u>ननु</u> "श्रोत्रियायैव देयानि" (म्ध् ३.११८) इति चानधीयानस्य प्राप्तिर् एव नास्ति । 

- <u>प्रक्रान्ताध्ययनः</u> अनधीतवेदः अगृहीतवेदश् चेत्[^२६८] प्राप्नुयात् ।


[^२६८]:
     M G 1st ed.: anadhītavedaś cet agṛhītavedaś cet

- <u>ननु</u> च "वेदपारगः" (म्ध् ३.१३५) इति वचनात् कुतः प्रक्रान्ताध्ययनस्य प्राप्तिः । 

- एवं तर्हि अधीतवेदो ऽप्य् अस्वीकृतवेदो ऽनधीयानो ऽभिप्रेतः । "व्रतस्थम् अपि दौहित्रम्"[^२६९] (म्ध् ३.२२४) इत्य् अनेन वा दौहित्रतैवात्र[^२७०] नाध्ययनम् इति कश्चिन् मन्येत तदर्थम् इदम् । अनधीयानस्य प्रतिषेधाद् विदुषस् तस्याधिकारो ऽस्तीत्य् अवगम्यते । 


[^२७०]:
     M G add: tatra


[^२६९]:
     M G omit: api dauhitram

- **दुर्वालः** स्खलितलोहितकेशो विकलेन्द्रियो[^२७१] वा । तस्य हि[^२७२] निर्वचनं कुर्वन्ति । दूर्वया[^२७३] शाद्वलेनाप्य् अलं तस्य वासो भवतीति । स हि दूर्वयैव प्राव्रियते लज्जया च वाससाम् अभावे तावन्मात्रेणाप्य् अपिदधाति[^२७४] शेफम् । **कितवो** द्यूतकारः । **याजयन्ति च ये पूगान्** संघान् । व्रात्यस्तोमादिभिर् व्रात्यानां हि संहितानां यागो विहितः । प्रतिषिद्धं च तद् याजनं "व्रात्यानां याजनं कृत्वा" (म्ध् ११.१९६) इति । वयं ब्रूमः । यः क्रमशः प्रत्येकम् अपि बहून् याजयति बहुकृत्व आर्त्विज्यं करोति, सो ऽपि न भोज्यः । तथ् च वसिष्ठः- "यश् चापि बहुयाज्यः स्याद् यश् चोपनयते बहून्" (वध् १४.१७) इति । 


[^२७४]:
     M G: tāvanmātreṇāpi dadhāti


[^२७३]:
     M G: dūrvā


[^२७२]:
     M G: ca hi


[^२७१]:
     M G: vikeśendriyo

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः- श्राद्धग्रहणात् पित्र्य एवैषां प्रतिषेधो न तु दैवे। 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । तद् अपि श्राद्धाङ्गम् एव श्राद्धशब्देन युक्तं वक्तुम् ॥ ३.१४१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*One with braided hair*’—*i.e*., the Student; this arrangement of the
hair has been laid down as an optional alternative for him—‘he should
either shave his head or wear his hair in braids’ (2-219); the ‘braided
hair’ is mentioned here only as an indicative of the Student; hence the
present verse includes also that student who may have shaved his head.
And the student whose feeding is prohibited here is only *one who is not
studying*.

“In view of what has been said above in regard to the propriety of
feeding one who is learned in the Veda (128), there can be no
possibility of anyone feeding a man *who is not studying* (why then
should his feeding be specially prohibited?)”

The prohibition is necessary, as otherwise one might feed the student
who began his study, but did not carry it on and did not learn the Veda.

“But it has been said above (145) that one should feed him who is
‘*thoroughly versed in the Veda*;’ where, then, could there be any
possibility of the admission of one who had only made a beginning of
study?”

In that case, we shall take the prohibition as applying to that student
who may have read through the Veda, without having made it all his own.

Or, the phrase ‘*who is not learned*’ may be taken as added to guard
against the contingency that, on the strength of what is said (in 3,
234) regarding the propriety of feeding the daughter’s son, even though
he he still in the state of studentship, some people might be led to
think the only necessary qualification consisted in the person invited
being the ‘daughter’s son,’ and ‘learning’ was not an essential
condition at all. And when the student¹ who is not studying’ becomes
precluded, it naturally follows that the student who is studying is
entitled to be fed.

‘*Durrāla*;’—this term may mean either one whose hair have fallen off,
or one who is red-haired, or one who is without hair in his private
parts. In this sense, they explain the etymology of the word as
follows:—‘mere grass suffices for his clothing, he is covered by mere
grass, having no clothing, ho hides his private parts with mere grass,’

^(‘)*Gambler*’— who is addicted to gambling.

^(‘)*Who* *sacrifice* *for hosts*’— for groups of men. The collective
performance of the I *Vrātyastoma* for a number of *Vrātyas* has been
prescribed: and officiating at such sacrifices has been prohibited under
II. 197.

Our explanation, however, is that the phrase applies to one who may
sacrifice, even by turns, for many persons:—*i.e*., who undertakes
service as priest very frequently:—such a person also shall not be fed.
Says Vaśiṣṭha—‘He who sacrifices for many men, and he who initiates many
persons.’

Some people hold that, since the present verse specifies
the^(‘)*Śrāddha*,’ the interdict herein contained pertains only to rites
in honour of the Pitṛs, not to those in honour of the gods.

This, however, is not right. Because the rites in honour of the gods
(*Viśvedevas*) are also a part of the ‘*Śrāddha*,’ which latter term
therefore can be used in connection with these also.—(151)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 687), which adds
(on p. 688) the notes that—‘*Jaṭila*’ means the

Student, who is qualified by the adjective ‘*anadhīyānaḥ*’, so that the
person precluded is the Student *who is not reading*,—one who is reading
being regarded as fit to be invited, the unreading Student could not be
included under the term ‘not learned in the Veda,’ as there is every
likelihood of people falling into the mistake that even though not
reading, the Student deserves to be invited;—the ‘*Durvāla*’ is one who
is ‘bald’, or ‘tawny-haired’;—the ‘*Kitava*’ is ‘one addicted to
gambling’;—the ‘*Pūgayājaka*’ is ‘one who sacrifices for hosts.’—It goes
on to add that the addition of the term ‘*Śrāddha*’ indicates that the
persons here enumerated are to be excluded from invitation only at
Śrāddhas, and not from the rites performed in honour of the gods;
otherwise the addition would be superfluous.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 450), which explains ‘*jaṭilam*’ as ‘the
*Brahmacārī*,’ and ‘*durbāla*’ as ‘*khalatiḥ*;’—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 480);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 9a).

‘*Jaṭilam ca anadhīyānam*’—Medhātithi takes ‘*anadhīyānam*’ as
qualifying ‘*jaṭilam*’, explaining the two together as ‘the Student who
is not learned; *i.e*., who began the study, hut did not complete
it’;—Kullūka also takes the two together; but explains ‘*anadhīyānam*’
as ‘one who has only had his Upanayana performed, but has not been
taught the Veda’; and adds that ‘this implies that one may invite that
Student *who is still studying the Veda*, though he may not have
mastered it.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.150-166)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.150].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

151	Let him not entertain at a Sraddha one who wears his hair in braids (a student), one who has not studied (the Veda), one afflicted with a skin-disease, a gambler, nor those who sacrifice for a multitude (of sacrificers).
</details>
