+++
title = "154 यक्ष्मी च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The invalid, the cattle-tender, one who has superseded h is elder brother, he who neglects the Great Sacrifices, one who is inimical to Brāhmaṇas, he who has been superseded by his younger brother, and one who is member of a company.—(154)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यक्ष्मी** व्याधितः । राजयक्ष्मगृहीत इत्य् <u>अन्ये</u> । **पशुपालः** यष्टिहस्तस् तद्वृत्तिजीवनः ।

- **निराकृतिः** सत्य् अधिकारे महायज्ञानुष्ठानरहितः । अद्यत्वे ऽप्य् अनुपजीव्यः अनद्धा निराकृतिर् उच्यते । एवं हि शतपथे- "यो न देवान् अर्चति न पितॄन् न मनुष्यान्" (श्ब् ६.३.१.२४) इति । <u>यैस्</u> तु पठ्यते- "अस्वाध्यायश्रुतधनैर् निराकृतिर् उदात्दृतः" इति, न ते शब्दार्थसंबन्धविदः । तस्येहाप्राप्तिर्[^२७७] एव, श्रोत्रियनियमात् । निराकर्ता देवादीनां निराकृतिर् इति धात्वर्थानुगमो ऽस्ति । धर्मधर्मिणोश् चाभेदविवक्षायां क्तिनापि[^२७८] प्रयोग उपपन्न इति । निपूर्वो ऽयं धातुर् अपवर्जने वर्तते । निराकृता अपवर्जिता उच्यन्ते- भोजनान् निराकृता, अधिकारान् निराकृता इति । अवर्जनं चाकृतिः सा निर्गतास्माद् इति निराकृतिः । संस्थानं चाकृतिस् तथा च कुत्सायां निर्द्रष्टव्यो दुराक्र्तिर् निषिध्यते । आह च "वाग्रूपवयःशीलसंपन्नः" (ग्ध् १५.९) । वाक्संपन्नो वाग्मी पटुवागिन्द्रियश् च । बहुजिह्वो न भोज्याः । रूपसंपन्नो मनोहरावयवसंनिवेशः । वयःसंपन्नः[^२७९] । "युवभ्यो दानं प्रथमं प्रतिवयस इत्य् एके" (ग्ध् १५.१०–११) इति । संज्ञाशब्दो वायं क्तिजन्तः । 


[^२७९]:
     M G: rūpasaṃpannamanoharāvayavasaṃniveśavayaḥsaṃpannaḥ |


[^२७८]:
     M G 1st ed.: kenāpi


[^२७७]:
     M G 1st ed.: tatas tasyehāprāptir

- **ब्रह्मद्विट्** ब्राह्मणानां वेदस्य वा द्वेष्टा, ब्रह्मशब्दस्योभयार्थवाचित्वात्- "ब्रह्मज्ञो ब्राह्मणः स्मृतः" इति । **गणः** सङ्घः । सहैकया क्रियया जीवन्ति ये ते गणशब्दवाच्यास् तदर्तर्गताश् चातुर्विद्यब्राह्मणाः । **परिवेत्तृपरिवित्ती** वक्ष्यमाणस्वरूपौ ॥ ३.१४४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*yakṣmī*’ stands here for the *invalid* in general. Some peope
take it as standing for *one suffering from consumption*.

‘*Cattle-tender*’— he who, stick in hand, tends cattle as a profession.

‘*Nirākṛti*,’ ‘*who neglects the Great Sacrifices*,’—one who, though
entitled to perform the Great Sacrifices, fails, to perform them. Even
now-a-days, one who fails to perform the Great Sacrifices, and is, on
that account, regarded as incapable of being served,’ is called
‘*Nirākṛti*.’ Thus we read in the *Śatapatha*—‘ one who worships neither
gods, nor ancestors nor men.’

Some people quote the definition that—‘the man devoid of Vedic study,
learning and wealth is called *Nirākṛti*;’ but these people are ignorant
of the right meaning of words; because the person mentioned in this
definition can have no connection with the present context, which deals
exclusively with ‘persons learned in the Veda.’ If the term ‘*Nirākṛti*’
is taken iii the sense of ‘the derider, *Nirākartā*, of gods, etc.,’
then there is. some compatibility with the literal signification of the
root; and even though the term ends with the abstract affix, ‘*ktin*,’
and as such is an abstract noun denoting a *quality*, yet its use in the
sense of the person having that quality may be justified on the
principle that there is no difference between the *quality* and *one
possessing the quality*.

Then again, the root in the term ‘*Nirākṛti*,’ when preceded by ‘*ni*,’
signifies *exclusion*: people who are excluded are said to be
‘*Nirākṛta*;’ as we find in such expressions as ‘*Nirākṛta*, excluded,
from dinner,’ ‘*Nirākṛta*, excluded, from title,’ and so forth. Thus
*non-exclusion* would be ‘*ākrti*,’ ‘invitation;’ and one from whom this
has been set aside, would be ‘*Nirākṛti*.’

Further, ‘*ākṛti*’ also means *configuration*; the prefix ‘*ni*’ having
the sense of *reprehensibilty*, the term may be taken as excluding the
ill-figured person. It has been declared that (one should feed) ‘one who
is endowed with speech, beauty, age and diameter:’ here ‘endowed with
speech’ means *eloquent, of powerful speech*; but the man who is
garrulous should not be fed; ‘*endowed with beauty*’ means *having a
beautiful body and limbs*; ‘endowed with age’ means what Gautama (15.10)
has said in regard to ‘the feeding of older men before youths,’

Lastly, the term ‘*Nirākṛti*’ may be taken as ending in ‘*ktich*,’ and
being a proper name,

‘*One who is inimical to Brahman*’—one who hates Brāhmaṇas, or the Veda;
the term ‘*Brahman*’ denoting both (Brāhmaṇa and Veda); when, for
instance, it is said that ‘the Brāhmaṇa also is called *Brahman*.’

‘*Company*’—corporation; those, who subsist conjointly upon one means of
livelihood, are spoken of by the name ‘com *pany*;’ and those Brāhmaṇas
who are members of such a company.

‘*One who has superseded his elder brother*’ and ‘*one who has been
superseded by his younger brother*’—these are going to be described
later on.—(154)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Yakṣmī*’—‘Invalid in general, or (according to ‘others’) one suffering
from consumption’ (Medhātithi, who has favoured the latter explanation
on p. 159 of the text).

‘*Nirākṛtiḥ*’—‘One who omits the Great Sacrifices, even though entitled
to their performance’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘one who
forsakes the Vedas’ (Govindarāja);—‘one who does not recite the Veda, or
has forgotten it’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’—‘A member of a corporation of men subsisting
conjointly upon one means of livelihood’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘the headman of a village, or leader of a caravan’ (added by
Nārāyaṇa);—‘one who misappropriates the money of a corporation’ (Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 560), which explains
‘*paśupālaḥ*’ as ‘one who tends cattle as a means of
living’,—‘*Nirākṛtiḥ*’ as ‘atheist,’—and ‘*gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’ as ‘a
Brāhmaṇa who is a member of a *Maṭha*, a religious corporation.’

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 687), which adds (on p. 690) the following
notes:—The ‘*yakṣmī*’ is the ‘consumptive’;—the ‘cattle-tender’ meant to
be excluded is one who does the work even in normal times,—the
‘*parivettā*’ is the younger brother who takes a wife or sets up the
fire, before his elder brother; and ‘*Parivitti*’ is the elder brother
thus superseded,—the ‘elder brother’ here meant being the ‘uterine
brother’, as there is nothing wrong in the ‘superseding’ of other kinds
of brothers; though, under certain circumstances, the ‘superseding’ of
the elder uterine brother also is not considered wrong; *e*. *g*., when
the brother happens to be impotent, or away in foreign lands, or become
an outcaste, or turn an ascetic, or entirely given to yogic practices,
and as such has renounced the world, and so forth;—the ‘*nirākṛti*’ is
one who, having read the Veda, has forgotten it’;—and the
‘*gaṇābhyantara*’ is ‘one who is a member of a group of men belonging to
various castes and engaged in uncertain ways of living.’

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 481);—and in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 40), which explains ‘*yakṣmī*’ as ‘one
suffering from consumption’ and ‘*nirākṛtiḥ*’ as ‘one who does not
perform the Five Daily Sacrifices,’—and ‘*gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’ as ‘one who
makes a living by a temple dedicated to the public.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.150-166)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.150].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

154	One suffering from consumption, one who subsists by tending cattle, a younger brother who marries or kindles the sacred fire before the elder, one who neglects the five great sacrifices, an enemy of the Brahmana race, an elder brother who marries or kindles the sacred fire after the younger, and one who belongs to a company or corporation,
</details>
