+++
title = "160 धनुः-शराणाङ् कर्ता"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The maker of bows and arrows, he whose wife dallies with another person and he who makes love to his brother’s widow, he who injures a friend, he who subsists by gambling and he who has his own son for his teacher.—(160)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

धनुः शरांश् च यः शिल्पीव करोति । **यश् चाग्रेदिधिषूपतिः** । दिधिषूशब्दः काकाक्षिवद् उभयेन संबध्यते । स्मृतिशास्त्रत्वाच् चेदृशः संबन्धो लभ्यते । लेखालोष्ठादयो ऽपि स्मृत्यर्थं संकेत्यन्ते भवन्ति चार्थकराः । अत एतन् न वाच्यम् "कथम् एकशब्दः समासान्तर्गतो द्वाभ्यां भिन्नप्रस्थानाभ्याम् अभिसंबध्येत इति । गौतमेन हि द्वयं निषिद्धम् (ग्ध् १५.१६) । इहापि संबन्धभेदे लिङ्गम् । द्विपदः समासः । न ह्य् अग्रेदिधिषूपतिर् नाम कश्चिद् अस्ति । एतौ च वक्ष्यमाणलक्षणौ । 

- **मित्रध्रुक्** । मित्रं यो द्रुह्यति । मित्रस्य यः कार्योपघाते वर्तते ।[^२८९] **द्यूतवृत्तिर्** द्यूतं[^२९०] जीविका यस्य ।


[^२९०]:
     M G omit: dyūtaṃ


[^२८९]:
     M G 1st ed. add: dyūtajñaḥ

- <u>ननु</u> च "कितवो मदयपः" इत्य् अत्रोक्तम् एव ।

- <u>नावश्यं</u> **द्यूतवृत्तिर्** एव द्यूतस्य प्रयोजकः, किं तर्हि यः स्वयं देवितुं न जानाति गुरुभयाद् वा न दीव्यति । व्यसनी तु देवैः शप्ततयान्यं देवयति । तदर्थो द्वितीयः कितवशब्दः । अथ वा अनृतश्तीका[^२९१] द्यूतसभास्थाणवो **द्यूतवृत्तयः** । 


[^२९१]:
     M G 1st ed.: anṛtastrīka; G 2nd ed.: anṛtaśrīka

- **पुत्र आचार्यो** ऽध्यापको यस्य । मुख्यम् आचार्यत्वं न पुत्रे संभवति ॥ ३.१५० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

He who, as a professional artisan, makes bows and arrows.

‘*Agredidhiṣūpatiḥ*;’—the term ‘*didhiṣū*’ is connected both ways, like
the single eye-ball of the crow operating in both sockets. Such a
construction is permissible, because the text belongs to the category of
a ‘*snmṛti-śātra*.’ Even (meaningless) lines and clods of earth are made
to yield some meaning, in consideration of the requirements of *Smṛtis*;
and they come out useful too. For this reason, the objection need not be
raised as to how a single term occurring in the middle of a compound can
be construed with two different terms. In fact. Gautama (15.16) has
expressly prohibited both (The ‘*agredidhiṣū*’ and the ‘*didhiṣūpati*’),
and this indicates the plausibility of the above construction; and the
compound really contains two terms. Further, there is no such person as
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*.’ The definition of these two (‘*agredidhiṣū* and
*didhiṣūpatī*’) will he supplied later on.

‘*Who injures a friend*’—who puts obstacles in a friend’s business.

‘*Who subsists* *by gambling*’—The man for whom gambling is the means of
subsistence.

“Such a person has already been mentioned in the preceding verse.”

But the person who helps people to gamble (The ‘keeper of a gambling
house, mentioned before) is not necessarily one who makes a living by
it; in fact, it is one who himself does not know gambling, or who does
not do it through fear of his elders; hut, being addicted to it as an
amusement, he always makes others gamble; and it is for excluding this
kind of man that we had the second ‘*Kitava*’ (in the preceding verse;
the word ‘*Kitava*’ having been first included in verse 151).

Or, the term ‘*dyūtavṛtti*’ may stand for those who, without any money
themselves, are constant dummy visitors at gambling places.

He whose son is his *teacher*; it is not possible for the son to be his
father’s ‘*ācārya*’ in the real sense of this term.—(160)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Agredidhiṣūpatiḥ*’—According to Medhātithi, this means (a) the
‘*Didhiṣūpati*’, *i.e*., one who makes love to his brother’s widow
(according to 173 below)—and also (b) the ‘*Agredidhisū*’, *i.e*., the
man whose wife dallies with another person (according to definition
quoted by Medhātithi on 173). This interpretation is supported by Manu
3.173 (read with Prajāpati, quoted by *Maskari Bhāṣya* on Gautama sūtra
15.16), which adds to Manu 173, the further assertion *saṃ caiva jīvato
bhrātuḥ sa cāgredidhiṣūḥ samṛtaḥ*, which would apply the name
*agredidhiṣū* to that man whose wife dallies with his younger brother,
during his own life-time. It may be remarked that Gautama (15.16)
contains the compound *agredidhiṣūpatididhiṣūpati*; and it has been
construed by the *Maskari-bhāṣya* to mean *agredidhiṣū* and
*didhiṣūpati* (thus supporting Medhātithi); or (1) *agredidhiṣūpati*
(husband of a girl who is married before her elder sister) and
*didhiṣūpati* (husband of a girl whose younger sister is married before
her).

Medhātithi does not resolve the compound, as Buhler puts it, into
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’ and ‘*didhiṣūpati*’; in fact he actually denies that
there is any such person as ‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’;—though it is difficult
to see how this statement here by Medhātithi is to he reconciled with
what he says under verse 173 below, that ‘the definition of
*Agredidhiṣūpati* should be learnt from another *Smṛti*’,—and this
definition is quoted as ‘if the brother is alive, the man is to be known
as *Agredidhiṣūpati*; so that the *Didhiṣūpati* is the man making love
to his *dead* brother’s wife’ (according to Manu 3.173), while
*Agredidhiṣūpati* is one whose wife dallies with his younger brother
during his own life-time.

Kullūka quotes Laugākṣi to the effect that ‘when the younger sister is
married while the elder is still unmarried, the former is the
*Agredidhiṣū* and the latter the *didhiṣū*’; and on the strength of this
he would exclude ‘the husband of the younger sister marrying before her
elder sister. But as rightly remarked by Buhler, this definition of
Laugākṣi cannot be accepted in the interpretation of Manu who has
himself (in verse 173) provided a totally different definition. It is
interesting to note that the Maskaribhāṣya on Gautama (15.16) attributes
to Manu the definition quoted by Kullūka as Laugākṣi’s.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, which quotes this text of Manu on p. 688, and
explains it on p. 693) cites the verse quoted by Kullūka (from
Laugākṣi), but attributes it to Devala, and explains the term
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’ in the same manner as Kullūka.

‘*Dyūtavṛttiḥ*’—‘He who makes a living by gambling’ (Medhātithi, who
does *not* explain the term to mean ‘one who makes others play for his
profit’; also Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘the keeper of a gambling-house’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

‘*Putrācāryaḥ*’ is explained in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 694) as
‘*akṣarapāṭhakaḥ*’ the teacher of alphabets. So the status of the
Primary School Teacher of ancient days was no better than that of their
representatives at the present day!

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 481).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.150-166)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.150].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

160	A maker of bows and of arrows, he who lasciviously dallies with a brother's widow, the betrayer of a friend, one who subsists by gambling, he who learns (the Veda) from his son,
</details>
