+++
title = "171 दाराग्निहोत्रसंयोगङ् कुरुते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who unites himself with “wife” and “Agnihotra,” while his elder remains, is to be regarded as the “superseder of his elder;” and the elder is to be regarded as “one who is superseded.”’—(171)


agraje brahmacaryasthe yo'nujo dārasaṅgraham | 
kurute parivettā sa paricitto'grejo bhavet ||
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अग्रे आदौ जातः **अग्रजः** सोदर्यो भ्रातोच्यते । एवम् हि पठ्यते- 

- पितृव्यपुत्रान् सापत्नान् परनारीसुतांस् तथा ।

- दाराग्निहोत्रसंयोगे न दोषः परिवेदने ॥ इति । (प्स्म् ४.२८)

अत्र सोदर्यो ऽग्रजः । तस्मिन् **स्थिते** ऽकृतदाराग्निसंयोगे । तिष्ठति प्रकृतव्यापारनिवृत्तौ प्रयुक्तः । **अग्निहोत्र**शब्दः कर्मवचनो ऽपि तदर्थे ऽग्न्याधाने वर्तते । स्मृत्यन्तरे विशेषः पठ्यते-

- उन्मत्तः किल्बिषी कुष्ठी पतितः क्लीब एव च ।

- राजयक्ष्मामयावी च न योग्यः स्यात् प्रतीक्षितुम् ॥

एतद् अप्य् अनधिकारोपलक्षणार्थम् । अतश् चापाङ्क्तेयो ऽपि गृह्यते[^३००] । कालविशेषो ऽधिको व्यपेक्षते । तथा च स्मृतिः- "अष्टौ वर्षान्य् उदीक्षेत षड् इत्य् एके" (ग्ध् १८.१९) इति । एषा च वर्षसंख्या यदा कनीयान् प्राप्तविवाहकालः ततः प्रभृति द्रष्टव्यः[^३०१] । विवाहकालश् च स्वाध्यायविधिनिवृत्तिः ।


[^३०१]:
     M G 1st ed.: praṣṭavyaḥ


[^३००]:
     M G: ca paṅktāv api gṛhyete

- <u>ननु</u> च प्रोषिताधिकारे तत् पठितम् । भर्तरि प्रोषिते यः स्त्रीणां प्रवासकालस् तम् उपक्रम्य भ्रातरीत्यादि पठितम् ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । वाक्यान्तरे प्रोषितशब्दस्य प्रत्यक्षः संबन्धो ऽवगतः । वाक्यान्तरे तु संबन्धे प्रमाणं वक्तव्यम् । न च तद् अस्ति, यथा स्वरितेनाधिकार इति (च्ड़्। पाण् १.३.११) । न चात्र तच्छब्दो ऽस्ति । न च तदपेक्षया विनैव तस्य वाक्यस्यापरिपूर्णत्वम् । वसिष्ठेन चाविशेषेणाग्निशब्देन स्मार्तस्याप्य् अग्नेर् ग्रहणं कृतम्[^३०२] । 


[^३०२]:
     It is difficult to identify the passage precisely, but see VaDh 6.11; 8.3; 12.27 etc.

- <u>केचित्</u> पितर्य् अप्य् अकृताधाने विधिम् इच्छन्ति । अग्रजशब्दस्य यौगिकत्वात् पिताप्य् अग्रजो भवतीति । 

- <u>यद्य्</u> अप्य् एवम् अन्यो ऽपि यो ऽग्रजस् तत्राप्य् एवं प्राप्नोति । न चायम् अग्रजानुजव्यवहारः पितापुत्रयोर् विद्यते । स्मृत्यन्तरे ऽपि तु पठ्यते "भ्रातरि च ज्याससि" (ग्ध् १८.१८) इति । 

- **परिवित्तिः** **पूर्वजो** ज्येष्ठः ॥ ३.१६१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Agraja*,’ ‘*elder brother*’—is the uterine brother born before one.
Thus has it been asserted—‘There is no harm in the superseding of the
uncle’s sons, the step-mother’s sons and the sons of other’s wives, by
marriage and the setting up of fire;’ hence, in the present context, the
term ‘elder brother’ stands for the uterine brother. While he
‘*remains*’—*i.e*., without marriage and without having set up the fire;
the root ‘*stkā*’ (in the term ‘*sthitê*’) has been used in the sense of
*the absence of the act mentioned*.

The term ‘*agnihotra*,’ though the name of the *act* of sacrifice,
stands for the *setting up of fire* for purposes of that act.

In another *smṛti*, we find an exception—‘the lunatic, the sinner, the
leper, the outcast, the eunuch and the consumptive need not be waited
for.’ What is mentioned here is meant to be indicative of the condition
in the form of the elder brother being in any way not entitled (to marry
and set up the fire). Hence the ‘defiler of company’ is also included.

A special period has also been specified during which one is to wait for
his elder brother to marry and set up the fire—‘one should wait for
eight years,’—‘some say for six years’ (*Gautama*, 18.19). This period
is to be reckoned from the time when the younger brother has reached the
age of marriage; and the age of marriage is the time when one has duly
fulfilled the injunction of Vedic Study.

“As a matter of fact, the period of time stated in the passage quoted
refers to the man who has gone out travelling. The passage quoted above
begins with the word ‘the elder brother being,’ which refers to the time
during which the elder brother is out on travel. \[So that it can have
no bearing upon *supersession* by marriage\].”

True; but the term ‘who has gone out on travel’ is distinctly found to
be connected with one sentence \[this sentence being ‘*pravrajite
nivṛttiḥ prasaṅgāt*, *Gautama*, 18.16\]; so that, for connecting the
same word with another sentence \[‘*bhrātari chaivam jyāyasi yavīyān*,
18.18\], some special reasons should be stated. There is, however, no
such reason; as there is in the case of such words as ‘there is
connection between this and the term *svarita*;’ no such words, however,
are found in the case of the sentences in question; nor is one sentence
incomplete without the connection of the word in question.

*Vaśiṣṭha* has used the generic term ‘fire and has, therefore, meant the
‘*Smārta*’ Fire.

Some people have held this definition of ‘superseder’ to apply also to
one whose father has not set up the Fire; the term ‘*agraja*,’ ‘elder,’
meaning simply ‘one born before one;’ so that the Father also is one’s
‘elder.’

In this manner, what is said here would apply to other ‘older’ persons
also; as a matter of fact, however, the terms ‘younger’ and ‘elder’ are
never used between father and son.

In another *Smṛti* we find—‘the elder *brother* being, etc., etc.’
(Gautama, 18.18. where the *Brother* is specifically mentioned).

The elder brother is called the ‘*superseded*’— (171)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi*—(P. 259, l.5)—‘*Bhrātarītyādi paṭhitam*’,—*i.e*., in
Gautama ‘*Pravrajite nivṛttiḥ prasaṅgāt*’ (18.16)... ‘*Bhrātari chaivam
jyāyasi yavīyān kanyāgnyupayameṣu*’ (18.18);—the latter *Sūtra* is
referred to again in 1.11.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.223) in the sense that—‘the
younger brother, who takes a wife or sets up the Fire, before his elder
brother has done so, is called *Parivettā*, and the elder brother is
called *Parivitti*.’

*Aparārka* deals with this subject in detail, under this same text of
Yājñavalkya.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 170) quotes this verse and explains that the ‘elder
brother’ meant here is the *uterine* brother, not the step-brother.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 760), which also explains
that the ‘elder brother’ meant is the *uterine brother*, as is clearly
declared in a text quoted from Garga. It quotes another verse from
‘Manu’, which is not found in our texts:—

> agraje brahmacaryasthe yo'nujo dārasaṅgraham \|  
> kurute parivettā sa paricitto'grejo bhavet \|\|

It has a curious note regarding the exact signification of the term
‘*ṣodarya*’ (generally understood to mean *uterine*): It
says—‘*sodaryatva*’ is of three kinds—(1) due to the father being the
same; (2) due to the mother being the same, and (3) due to both being
the same; the idea that ‘*sodaryatva*’ is based upon the sameness of the
Father is derived from the *Garbhopaniṣad* text that ‘at first the fetus
is born in the male’, as also from the *Mahābhārata* text—‘Having stayed
in the father’s stomach, he entered the Mother through his semen’; and
again in the same work, Kacha is representented as saying to Devayānī
that she was his ‘sister’ because she had lived in the same father’s
stomach as he himself had done.

The verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācara, p. 690), where also
‘elder brother’ is explained as the *uterine brother*;—also in
*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 723), where the construction of the phrase
‘*agraje sthite*’ is explained as ‘*agraje anūḍhe akṛtāgnihotre ca
sthite*’. The untraced verse from ‘Manu’ quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* is
quoted here also.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 233) as forbidding the
setting up of the Fire by the younger brother if it has been already set
up by his elder;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 445, and again on p. 1050) as
defining the *Parivitti*;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 811), which notes that
this refers to *uterine* brothers only, and that also not in cases where
the elder brother is either an outcaste, or insane, or sexless, or
blind, or deaf, or dumb, or idiot, or dwarf, or leper, or suffering from
leucoderma, or consumptive, or suffering from dropsy, or from some
incurable disease, or heretic, or renunciate, or gone away for a long
time;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 371);—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
514).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gobhila-Smṛti* (1.70).—‘He who takes a wife or performs fire-laying
before his elder brother should be regarded as the *Superseder of the
Elder*, and the elder brother is to be regarded as the *Superseded*.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (40).—\[Reproduces the words of Manu.\]

*Garga* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 690).—‘While the uterine elder brother
remains unmarried, if one takes a wife or lays the fire, he becomes an
outcast.’

*Śātātapa* (Do.).—‘The sin of supersession is not involved if one
marries before such brothers as are the sons of uncles or of
step-mothers, or of other women.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 690).—(Do.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

171	He must be considered as a Parivettri who marries or begins the performance of the Agnihotra before his elder brother, but the latter as a Parivitti.
</details>
