+++
title = "187 पूर्वेद्युर् अपरेद्युर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the śrāddha-performance has approaohed, one should invite, either on the preceding day or the next day, in the proper manner, at least three brāhmaṇas, such as have been described.—(187)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३१९]:
     M G: nimantrayeta

उक्ता यादृशा ब्राह्मणा भोजनीयाः । इदानीम् अन्येतिकर्तव्यतोच्यते । **पूर्वेद्युर्** यद् अहः श्राद्धं कर्तव्यम् अमावास्यायां त्रयोदश्यां वा, ततः पूर्वस्मिन्न् अहनि चतुर्दश्यां द्वादश्यां वा, श्वः श्राद्धे कर्तव्ये ब्राह्मणान् निमन्त्रयेत् । **अपरेद्युस्** तदहर् एव वा । विकल्पश् चात्र नियमापेक्षः । यः शक्नोति नियमान् पालयितुं स पूर्वेद्युः, अशक्तस् तदहर् एव । अधिकनियमानुपालनाच् च महाफलम् । निमन्त्रणे कर्तव्ये अध्येषणपूर्वकम् व्यापारणम् अभ्युपगमनं च । त्रयो ऽवरा येषां ते **त्र्यवराः** । यद्य् अत्यन्तं न्यूनास् तदा त्रयः । शक्तौ त्व् अयुजो यथोत्साहम् इत्य् उक्तम् । अवशिष्टः पदसंघातः श्लोकपूरणार्थः । **उपस्थिते** प्राप्ते । **यथोदितान्** यथोक्तान् ॥ ३.१७७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been explained what sort of Brāhmaṇas should be fed; now the
author proceeds to describe other details of procedure.

‘*On the preceding day*’—on the day preceding the one on which the
*śrāddha* is to be performed; *i.e*., if the performance falls on the
*Amāvāsyā* or the *Trayodaśī*, then on *Caturdaśī* or *Dvādaśī*,
respectively;—*i.e*., when one is going to perform the *Śrāddha*
to-morrow, one should invite the Brāhmaṇas to-day.

‘*On the next day*’—*i.e*., on the same day as the performance.

The option here laid down is in consideration of the rules: if one is
able to follow the rules closely, then one should do the inviting on the
previous day; but if one is unable to do so, then one may do it on the
same day. There is no doubt, however, that a strict observance of the
rules would bring great rewards.

When the invitation is made, the inviter is to be approached and urged
with entreaties.

Those of whom three is the least number,—this is what is meant by ‘*at
least three*.’ That is, the least number that should be fed is *three*;
in the event of his being able to feed more, ‘he should feed an odd
number, according to his enthusiasm,’—as has already been prescribed
above.

The rest of the words are meant only to fill up the verse.

‘*Approached*,’— arrived.

‘*Such as has been described*,’—*i.e*., mentioned above—(187)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 83);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 697) as laying down certain details
regarding the inviting of Brāhmaṇas at *Śrāddhas*;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on
1.225), as justifying the option of inviting the Brāhmaṇas on ‘the day
following’ (the ‘previous day’ *i.e*., on the day of the performance
itself);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 1133 and 1146), which adds the
following notes—‘*Pūrvedyuḥ*’, ‘on the previous day,’ *i.e*., on the
Caturdaśī day if the Śrāddha is to be performed on
Amāvasyā;—‘*aparedyuḥ*’, ‘on the same day as the Śrāddha itself is
performed.’ We have an option here; he who can observe the rules of the
invitation for two days may do the inviting on the preceding day, others
who are not able to do so should do it on the Śrāddha day; the former
would be more meritorious as involving greater amount of self-denial;
others hold that the invitation is to be made on the previous day, if
the performer remembers the Śrāddha to be performed on the coming day;
and if one does not remember it, then he may invite the Brāhmaṇas on the
same day as the Śrāddha; others again hold that the invitation is to be
made on the Śrāddha day only when, for some reason, it cannot be made on
the preceding day; another view is that Householders are to be invited
on the previous day and Renunciates and Students on the same day. It
explains ‘*tryavarān*’ as ‘at least three,’ *i.e*., three, five or
seven; and adds that ‘*samyak*’ qualifies ‘*nimantrayet*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.8, 6).—‘Either on the previous day, or early in the
morning on the same day, he shall invite persons, whose number shall not
be an even one and which shall be at least three, who are well-versed
expounders of the Veda, who are not related to him either by birth or
*gotra* or *mantra*, who are pure and equipped with *mantras*; and shall
seat them on seats prepared of kuśa grass, facing either the east or the
north.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2, 17, 11-15).—‘The invitation shall be on the
previous day;—on the next day, the second one;—and the third is the
request;—some people teach that the Śrāddha should consist of about
three as the first, so the second and the third.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11, 14).—‘During the dark fortnight, after the fourth day,
he shall make an offering to the Pitṛs: having got them together on the
previous day, either Brāhmaṇas or renunciates or hermits,—such as are
advanced in age, have not deviated from their duties, are learned in the
Veda, are not the invitor’s own disciples or pupils; but he may feed
even his disciples, if they are possessed of special qualifications.’

*Viṣṇu* (73.1).—‘Going to perform the Śrāddha, he shall, on the previous
day, invite the Brāhmaṇas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1, 225).—‘The man, himself pure and self-controlled,
shall, on the previous day, invite the Brāhmaṇas.’

*Hārīta* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 696).—‘Going to perform the Śrāddha the
next day, he should invite the Brāhmaṇas on the previous day.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 696).—‘He shall approach the Brāhmaṇa
saying—*I shall perform Śrāddha to-morrow*—on the previous day; if that
be not possible, then on the same day.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Having made up his mind that he shall perform Śrāddha
on the coming day, he shall invite the Brāhmaṇas;... if that be not
possible, then the next day.’

*Varāhapurāṇa* (Do., p. 697).—‘Knowing that he would be performing
Śrāddha on the next day, he shall clean the ground and invite the
Brāhmaṇas.’

*Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘On the previous day, at night, he shall
approach the Brāhmaṇas after they have taken their evening meal and
invite them, on behalf of his father.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

187	On the day before the Sraddha-rite is performed, or on the day when it takes place, let him invite with due respect at least three Brahmanas, such as have been mentioned above.
</details>
