+++
title = "188 निमन्त्रितो द्विजः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The brāhmaṇa invited at a rite in honor of Pitṛs shall remain self-controlled and shall not recite the Veda; so also the man who performs the śrāddha.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पित्र्ये** श्राद्धे **निमन्त्रितो नियतात्मा**[^३२०] **भवेत्** । संयतात्मा ब्रह्मचर्यं परिरक्षेत्,[^३२१] अन्यांश् च यमनियमान् अनुतिष्ठेत स्नातकव्रतादीन् । पुरुषव्रतानां नृत्यगीतादिप्रतिषेधानां कर्माङ्गता विधीयते । तथा कर्तव्यं श्राद्धकृता यथासौ ब्राह्मणो निमन्त्रणात् प्रभृति संयतेन्द्रियो भवति, अन्यथा श्राद्धं दुष्येत् । **न च छन्दांसि** वेदान् अधीयीत[^३२२] । यच् च वेदाक्षरोच्चारणम् अध्ययनं तन् निषिध्यते । जपस् तु संध्योपासनादाव् अप्रतिषिद्धः । **यस्य** तत्कर्तव्यं **स्राद्धं भवेत्** । पित्र्ये श्राद्धे निमन्त्रितवन् **नियतात्मा भवेत्** । संयतात्मा च सो ऽपि **नियतात्मा भवेद्** इति पदयोजना । अतो भोक्तुः कर्तुश् च निमन्त्रणात् प्रभृति तुल्यो नियमो ऽनध्ययनं च ॥ ३.१७८ ॥


[^३२२]:
     M G 1st ed.: nādhīyīta


[^३२१]:
     M: parirakṣan; G: parirakṣeta


[^३२०]:
     G adds: yo 'sau
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One invited ‘*at a rite in honour of Pitṛs*’—*i.e*., a t a
*śrāddha—‘shall remain self controlled*;’ *i.e*., with his mind under
control, he shall maintain continence and keep up also the other
restraints and observances—such as the observances of the ‘*Snātaka*,’
and so forth. The avoidance of dancing, music, etc., which are the
observances to be kept up by men, has been prescribed as part and parcel
of religions rites; hence the performer of the *śrāddha* shall so
arrange things that the invited Brāhamaṇa, from the moment he has been
invited, shall keep control over his sense-organs; otherwise the
*śrāddha* would become defective.

‘*He shall not recite the Veda*;’—what is prohibited is the *reciting*
of the texts of the Veda; the mere repeating of *mantras* during the
evening and morning prayers is not prohibited.

‘*Also the man who performs the Śrāddha*’—*i.e*., at the rite that one
performs in honour of the Pitṛs, one should, like the invitee, remain
self-controlled; the construction is—‘So the man also...... shall remain
self-controlled.’ The meaning is, that the rule regarding self-control
and avoiding of Veda-reciting applies alike to the inviter and the
invitee, from the moment of invitation onwards.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 456);—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 1014), which adds the following notes:—The Brāhmaṇa invited at
Śrāddha should keep himself self-controlled, *i.e*., should keep himself
free from sexual intercourse and also keep the other restrictions;
Medhātithi

says that the obeservances laid down for the Accomplished Student, the
avoidance of dancing and music, &c. are all meant to be kept; the
meaning is that the inviter should see to it that the invited keeps
these restrictions:—‘*Chandāṃsi*’ Vedas;—‘*adhīyīta*’, ‘utter the words
of the Veda’; the *Japa* of texts is not prohibited:—the performer of
the *Śrāddha* himself also is to observe these restrictions; the role is
meant for both the inviter and the invited.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (15.23).—‘Therefore on that day, he shall live like a
religious student,’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.225).—‘They shall remain under self-restraint, with
mind, speech and acts duly controlled.’

*Prajāpati* (93).—‘The Brāhmaṇa invited at the Śrāddha should avoid
association with women on the previous day and on the next day; as also
the second meal.’

*Likhita* (60).—‘One who has eaten at the Śrāddha shall avoid eight
things: the second meal, journeying, carrying loads, study, sexual
intercourse, making and receiving gifts, and offering of oblations into
fire.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 457).—‘Having been previously invited, if the
Brāhmaṇa accept a gift, or if he eat at the Śrāddha after having taken
his food, then all his merit becomes destroyed.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

188	A Brahmana who has been invited to a (rite) in honour of the manes shall always control himself and not recite the Veda, and he who performs the Sraddha (must act in the same manner).
</details>
