+++
title = "205 दैवाद्यन्तन् तद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should first engage the Brāhmaṇa in honour of the gods, as a protection to these (offerings to) Pitṛs; for the Rākṣasas take away the śrāddha that is devoid of protection.—(204)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आदिश् च अन्तश् च आद्यन्तौ । दैवं आद्यन्ताव् अस्येति **दैवाद्यन्तम्** । दैवेन कर्मणा आदिर् उपक्रमः श्राद्धस्य कर्तव्यः । अतश् च निमन्त्रणं देवानां पूर्वं कर्तव्यम् । अन्तः समाप्तिः । विसर्जितेषु पित्र्येषु ब्राह्मणेषु पश्चाद् देवानां विसर्जनं कर्तव्यम् । 

- <u>गन्धादिदाने</u> ऽपि दैवोपक्रमतां मन्यन्ते । 

- <u>न तु</u> तेषां पदार्थानां दैवेनोपक्रमसमाप्ती संभवतः, आवृत्तिप्रसङ्गात् । प्रयोगधर्मश् चायं दैवाद्यन्तता, न प्रतिपदार्थधर्मः । पदार्थानां तु गन्धमाल्यादीनां दैवोपक्रमताविशेषेण[^३५८] कर्तव्यम् उद्दिश्यते । तावत् प्रवृत्तिकेनैव[^३५९] क्रमेण सिद्ध्यति । निमन्त्रणं तावद् दैवपूर्वं कर्तव्यम् । यत एव प्रथमः पदार्थ आरब्धस् तत एवान्येषाम् आरम्भो युक्तः । पदार्थः पदार्थान्तरारम्भं नियच्छति यतः । तद् उक्तम्- "प्रकृत्या कृतकालानां गुणानां तदुपक्रमात्" इति[^३६०] । 


[^३६०]:
     M G1st ed. add: padārthadharmaḥ


[^३५९]:
     M G 1st ed.: tāvatprāvṛttikenaiva; G 2nd ed.: tatprāvṛttikenaiva


[^३५८]:
     M G: daivopakramaṃ viśeṣeṇa

- तच् छ्राद्धकर्म **ईहेत** कुर्यात् । परिशिष्टो ऽर्थवादः । **पित्र्याद्यन्तं न तद् भवेत्** । दैवाद्यन्तत्वस्य विहितत्वात् पित्र्याद्यन्तप्रेतिषेधो ऽर्थवादतया लौकिकवाक्यवन् नेयः । लोके हि किंचिद् विधाय तद्विपरीतम् अप्राप्तम् अपि निषेधति । क्रिया हि द्र्वयं विनयति नाद्रव्यम् इति । **क्षिप्रं नश्यति सान्वयः** । संतानाफलप्रदर्शनरूपो ऽयं निन्दार्थवादः । अतश् च सर्वं परिवेषणादि दैवपूर्वकं कर्तव्यम् ।

- यत् त्व् अन्तरा भक्ताद्युपनयनं पिपासतां च पानादिदानं तद् यस्यैवेच्छा प्रथमम् उपजाता तस्मा एवोपनेतव्यम् । अनर्थिनस् तदनुरोधेनोपनीयमाने प्रधानविधिबाधः स्यात् "हर्षयेत् ब्राह्मणान्" इति । तथा कश्चिन् मधुररसप्रियो ऽपरो ऽम्लरससात्म्यस् तत्र, "भक्ष्यं भोज्यं च विविधं पानानि सुरभीणि च" (म्ध् ३.२१७) इति बहुषु पानकेषु सत्सु यद्य् अन्यानुरोधेन न अन्यत्र रससात्म्यम् आपादयेत् ततो व्याधिर् अस्य जनितः स्यात् । तस्माद् उपक्रमसमापने एव दैवादिना[^३६१] ॥ ३.१९५ ॥


[^३६१]:
     M: tasmād upakramaḥ samāno devādiḥ; G: devādinā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

That in whose beginning and at whose end a rite in honour of the gods is
performed is said to ‘*begin and end with a rite in honour of the
gods*.’ The beginning of the *Śrāddha* rite should be made with a rite
performed in honour of the gods; it is for this reason that the
invitation of the Brāhmaṇas in honour of the gods should be done first.
‘*End*’ is *completion*. The meaning is that the Brāhmaṇas fed in honour
of the gods.should be dismissed after those fed in honour of the Pitṛs
have been sent away.

Some people hold that in the offering of sandal-paste, *&c*. also,
beginning should be made with what is done in honour of the gods.

But, in regard to these details, it is not possible to make either the
beginning or the end with what is done in honour of the gods; as this
would lead to repe???on (repetition?). Further, that *it should begin
and end with what is done in honour of the gods* has been laid down here
as pertaining to the entire procedure, and not to each of the
intervening details. That the performance of the details shall begin
with what is done in honour of the gods would follow from the natural
course of the action; it having been fixed that the inviting is to begin
with those invited in honour of the gods, it would be only natural that
the other details shall also start with the same with which that first
step had started; since one detail controls the starting of another
detail, as laid down in the assertion that—‘the starting of the details
is determined by the time fixed for them in connection with the Primary
Act.’

Such a *Śrāddha* -rite one shall ‘endeavour’ to perform.

The rest of the verse is a purely laudatory description.

‘*It should never be one beginning and ending with a rite in honour of
the Pitṛs*’—Inasmuch as it has been already enjoined that the act should
begin and end with what is done in honour of the gods, the further
prohibition of beginning and ending with what is done in honour. of the
Pitṛs has to be taken, in the manner of ordinary assertions, as a purely
descriptive reiteration. In ordinary parlance, having laid down one
thing, one often negatives its contrary, even though there be no
possibility of this latter being adopted. As a matter of fact, an action
controls the substance, not what is not a substance.

‘*Quickly perishes, along with his progeny*;’—this deprecatoy
description is meant to indicate that the man fails to obtain the reward
in the form of offsprings.

From this it follows that all the acts, of serving the food and the
like, should begin with what is done in honour of the gods. As for what
is done during the process—the serving of more rice, &c., at intervals,
the supplying of water to those that may happen to want water for
drinking, and so forth,—all this should be done first to one who may
happen to express his desire first. If one were to offer these things to
one who does not want them, simply because of his being invited in
honour of the gods, then one would be trans- greasing the principal
injunction that—‘one should make the Brāhmaṇas happy.’

Some one may happen to be fond of sweets, another may be one who finds
adds more wholesome; so that, having provided “various edibles and
fragrant drinks” (Manu, 3. 227), if, by other considerations, one were
to give to one what suits his taste and constitution, the invitee would
contract disease.

From all this it follows that in the feeding it is only the beginning
and end that should be done with those invited in honour of the
gods.—(205)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 456) as meaning that the Brāhmaṇa
to be fed in honour of the Viśvedevas should be invited before that to
be fed in honour of the Pitṛs; and concludes that the matter is purely
optional, in view of the contrary rule laid down by Pracetas;—in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī*, (p. 54);—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 526),
which explains ‘*daivādyantam*’ as ‘beginning and ending with the
offering to the Devas’, which means that the invitation is to be made
afresh in connection with the *Devakṛtya*, and the concluding rites
should be performed last of all for the Devas;—and in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 1045), which says that the other rites shall begin with the
Devas, but the *Visarjana* is to be done last for the Devas.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghu-Hārīta* (96).—‘If one, through ignorance, makes offerings to the
Pitṛs and neglects the Gods, his Pitṛs abandon that Śrāddha as if it
were something unclean.’

*Devala*.—‘Whatever rite is performed in honour of Pitṛs should be
preceded by the offering to the Viśvedevas.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

205	Let him make (the Sraddha) begin and end with (a rite) in honour of the gods; it shall not begin and end with a (rite) to the manes; for he who makes it begin and end with a (rite) in honour of the manes, soon perishes together with his progeny.
</details>
