+++
title = "212 अग्न्य्-अभावे तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the absence of Fire, he shall make the offering into the Brāhmaṇa’s hand; for it has been declared by the Brāhmaṇa seers of Vedic texts that what the Fire is, that same is the Brāhmaṇa.—(212).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

स्मार्तस्य वैवाहिकस्य दायादेर् वा अग्नेर् अभावे विधिर् अयम् उच्यते । लौकिकस्य तु पितृयज्ञनिषेधात् भावाभावाव् अचिन्त्यौ । "न पैतृयज्ञिको होमो लौकिके ऽग्नौ" इति वक्ष्यति (म्ध् ३.२७२) । 

- कथं पुनस् तस्याग्नेर् अभावः । 

- प्रोषितस्याग्निना विना द्रव्यब्राह्मणदेशसंपत्तौ च श्राद्धकाल उक्तः, नामावस्यैव । तत्र[^३६५] प्रोषितेन यदि पङ्क्तिपावनः प्राप्तो द्रव्यं वा कालशाकादि तत्रायं विधिर् उच्यते ।


[^३६५]:
     G 1st ed. omits: tatra

- <u>ननु</u> च प्रोषितस्य कथं श्राद्धाधिकारः । यदि तावद् भार्या प्रवसति अग्निनापि तत्रैव संनिधातव्यम् । यतो नोभाभ्याम् अग्नेर् विरह इष्यते, भार्यया[^३६६] यजमानेन च । एवं हि श्रूयते- "नाग्निर् अन्तरितव्यः प्रवस्ताम्" इति । अथ केवल एव गृहस्थः प्रवसेत् तदा भवेद् अग्न्यभावः । किं तु मध्यकत्वाद् एतस्य सहाधिकाराच् च, भार्यायाम् असंनिहितायाम्, तदिच्छाया अभावात् कथं साधारणस्य श्राद्धे विनियोगः । साधारणे हि द्रव्ये अन्यतरानिच्छायां त्याग एव न संवर्तते ।


[^३६६]:
     G: bhāryāyā

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । तीर्थेष्व् अपि श्राद्धकरणम् अनेन न्यायेन न[^३६७] प्राप्नोति । तत्रेमानि वचनानि विरुध्यन्ते- 


[^३६७]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na

- पुष्करेष्व् अक्षयं श्राद्धं तपश् चैव महाफलम् ।

- महोदधौ प्रभासे च तद्वद् एव विनिर्दिशेत् ॥ इति ।

- <u>नैष दोषः</u> । भार्यया सह तीर्थयात्रां गच्छतः साग्निकस्योपपत्स्यते । इह तु भार्यया सह प्रवासः, तदा नास्त्य् अग्नेर् अभावः । अथ केवलस्य, तदा भार्येच्छाया अपरिज्ञानाद् अनधिकारः । 

- <u>उच्यते</u>[^३६८] । प्रवसन् भार्याम् अनुज्ञापयति "धर्माय विनियोगं द्रव्यस्य करिष्यामि" इति । तत्प्राप्तानुज्ञो ऽधिकरिष्यते । 


[^३६८]:
     M G 1st ed.: anadhikārā ucyante

- प्राक् चोपनयनाद्[^३६९] असत्य् अग्निपरिग्रहे विधिर् अयं भविष्यति । अस्ति चानुपनीतस्य श्राद्धाधिकारः । "स्वधानिनयणाद्" (म्ध् २.१७२) इति दर्शितम् । स्नातस्य च प्राग् विवाहात् पितृमरणादाव् अग्न्यभावः ।


[^३६९]:
     M G: copanayād

- <u>ननु</u> च परमेष्ठिमरणे ऽग्निपरिग्रहः काठके पठ्यते । 

- <u>कृतदारस्यासौ</u> द्रष्टव्यो न स्नातकमात्रस्य । द्वौ हि कालौ स्मार्तकस्याग्नेर् विहितौ- "भार्यादिर् दायादिर् वा"[^३७०] (ग्ध् ५.७) । तत्र येन विवाहकाले न परिगृहीतो ऽग्निः, पित्राविभक्तत्वात्, ज्येष्ठेन वा सह वसता "भ्रातॄणाम् अविभक्तानाम् एको धर्मः प्रवर्तते" (न्स्म् १३.३७) इति अनेन, तस्यासौ द्वितीयः कालः "दायकालाद् ऋते वा" इति । एष एव दायकालो यदा पिता म्रियते । तदपेक्षम् एवैतत् । "शुचिर् भूतः पितृभ्यो दद्यात्", "भ्राष्ट्र्यो हाग्निम् आनीय प्रतिजागृयात्" इति । न चेद् अग्न्याधानं श्राद्धाङ्गम् । तथा[^३७१] सति न[^३७२] तदर्वाग् यस्योत्पत्तिः श्राद्धं वा वर्तते । न चाप्य् अत्यागो ऽस्ति । "एष औपसदो ऽग्निस् तस्मिन् पाकयज्ञः" इति पठ्यते । न च पाकयज्ञे ऽप्य् अभार्यस्याधिकारः । "पत्न्यवेक्षितम् आज्यं भवति" । "व्रतं च पत्न्य् उपेयात्" इति दर्शपूर्णमासयोः श्रूयते । न च यदा पत्नी तदैतत् व्रतोपायनाज्यावेक्षणे पत्नीकर्तृके भविष्यत इति शक्यम् अवकल्पयितुम्, नित्यवद् आम्नानात् । विधिर् होतव्यः प्राप्नोति । 


[^३७२]:
     M G omit: na


[^३७१]:
     M G: tadā


[^३७०]:
     M G 1st ed.: bhāryāvivāhe

- <u>ननु</u> च न पितृमरणम् एव दायकालः । एवं हि पठ्यते- "सपिण्डीकरणं कृत्वा विभजेरन् ततः सुताः" इति ।

- <u>विभागस्यायं</u> कालो न दायस्य । विभागे ऽपि नायं नियमः, यतो "धर्म्या[^३७३] पृथक्क्रिया" (म्ध् ९.१११) इति पठ्यते । तस्याश् च धर्मत्वं विभक्तानां पृथक् पृथक् श्राद्धकरणेनातिथ्यादिपूजया च । 


[^३७३]:
     M G: dharmāt

- न च[^३७४] "नव श्राद्धं सह दद्युः" इत्यादीनि वाक्यानि समाप्तविद्याविषयाणि । ईषद्विद्यो रागोद्रेकात् स्वदारनियमं मातिक्रमिषम् इति कृतविवाहः प्रक्रान्तवेदार्थप्रवणस् तस्य संवत्सरमात्रेण विद्यासमाप्ताव् इदम् उच्यते- "सपिण्डीकरणं कृत्वा विभजेरन्" इति । तदा मृतभार्यस्य पुनर् दारांश् चिकीर्षत आ दारप्राप्तेर् भवत्य् अग्नेर् अभावः । सर्वथा पत्न्या सह यष्टव्यम् इत्य् अस्तित्ववचने सति नाकृतविवाहस्याग्निपरिग्रहः ।


[^३७४]:
     M G: tataś ca

- एवं स्थिते ऽग्नेर् अभावे आहुती ब्राह्मणस्य हस्ते प्रक्षिपेत् । कस्य ब्राह्मणस्य । य एव निमन्त्रितास् तेषाम् अन्यतमस्य दैव उपवेशितस्यान्यस्य वा निमन्त्रितस्य । अर्थवादो **यो ह्य् अग्निः** इति । **मन्त्रदर्शिभिः** संमतश् चेदम्[^३७५] अर्थविद्भिः ॥ ३.२०२ ॥


[^३७५]:
     M G: ced
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present text lays down an injunction in connection with those cases
where there is no fire, *i.e*., neither one set up according to
‘*smārta*’ rites, nor that kindled at marriage, nor that set up after
succession. As for the ordinary fire, since sacrificing to the Pitṛs in
such fire has been prohibited, there need be no consideration of the
presence or absence of such fire. It is going to be said later on (verse
282) that—‘oblations in connection with the offering to the Pitṛs should
not be offered in the ordinary fire.’

*Question*—“How can there be any possibility of the said Fire being
absent?”

*Answer*—It has been laid down that when a man is away from home and
without his Fire, if he happen to come by a desirable place, the proper
materials and the right type of Brāhmaṇas, he shall regard this as a
suitable opportunity for offering *Śrāddha*; and it is not that the
moonless day is the only one on which *Śrāddha* is to be performed.
Hence the present rule is meant for the man who, when out on a journey,
comes by a ‘sanctifier of company,’ or finds such suitable materials as
the ‘*Kālaśāka*,’ and the like.

“How can one away from home be entitled to the performance of
*Śrāddhas*? If the wife is also with him, away from home, then the Fire
also should be with them; since it is not considered desirable for the
Fire to be separated from both the sacrificer and his wife. It has been
declared that—‘for people away from home, the Fire shall not be
separated.’ If the Householder should happen to go out alone, then there
may be ‘absence of Fire;’ but the man is entitled to make offerings only
when associated with his wife; so that, when the wife is not near him,
her acquiescence being not available, how could there be any possibility
of the man making use of materials belonging to both? In the case of a
material belonging to both, there can be no giving away, in the absence
of the desire of either party. Against this it might be argued that—‘by
the line of reasoning just put forward, it would be impossible to
perform *Śrāddhas* in sacred places (during pilgrimages); and such
non-performance would be contrary to such declarations as—‘at Puṣkara
the Śrāddha is inexhaustible, austerity is highly meritorious; the same
is to be held regarding the Ocean and Prabhāsa.’ There is no force in
this; as such performance would be quite possible for the man who has
set up the Fire, when he goes out on pilgrimage along with his wife. In
the case in question, however, since the man would be journeying with
his wife, the Fire could not be absent. If, however, the man he
journeying alone, then, since he would be ignorant of his wife’s wishes
in the matter, he could not be entitled to the performance.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—When a man is proceeding on a
journey, he seeks his wife’s permission in the following words—‘I shall
be spending our belongings over religious performances;’ and having
obtained this permission, he could be entitled to the performance of
*Śrāddhas*.

Or, the rule laid down in the present text might pertain to boys before
their initiation, at which time the Fire has not been set up; and the
uninitiated boy also is entitled to the performance of *Śrāddha*, as has
been shown under the text where it has been declared that the boy is not
entitled to any rite, *except the offering of Śrāddhas*. Further, for
the Accomplished Student also, if his father happens to die before his
marriage, there would be ‘absence of fire.’

“In the Kāṭhaka, it is found stated that, on the death of the master of
the house, fire should be set up (by his successor),”

This should be taken as applying to one who has married, and not to one
who has merely just completed his studies. Two points of time have been
laid down for the setting up of the ‘*Smārta*’ Fire—on marriage and on
succession. So that, if one has not set up the Fire on marriage,—either
because he does not set up a separate household apart from his father,
or because he continues to live with his elder brother, according to the
law that ‘for brothers that have not separated there is a common
religious rite,’—for such a person, there is the other point of time, on
*succession*, according to the injunction—‘or, from the time of
succession;’ and the ‘time of succession’ is just the time when the
Father dies. And it is to such cases that the following declarations
apply,—‘having become pure, one should make offerings to the Pitṛs,’
‘one should bring fire from the fryer’s pan and then keep vigil,’ and so
forth. The setting up of the Fire mentioned in these texts (referring to
the Fire kindled for the day only) could not be regarded as an essential
factor in *Śrāddha*; for, if it were so, then, before the kindling of
this Fire, since the Fire would not be there, no *Śrāddha* could be
performed. Nor, again, is it possible that such a fire (set up for a
temporary purpose) should not be abandoned. It has been declared that
‘this is the Aupasada Fire, in which the culinary offerings have to be
made;’ and to the culinary offerings also a man without a wife is not
entitled; because of such injunctions as ‘the butter is examined by the
wife,’ ‘the wife should keep the observances,’ and so forth. It will not
be right to argue that—“this keeping of observances and the examining of
the butter are meant to apply to cases where the wife is
present;”—because both these acts have been enjoined as entirely
obligatory. Hence the meaning comes to be that libations are to be
poured into the ‘Aupasada’ fire.

“The father’s death is not the precise time of *succession*; since it
has been declared that the sons shall divide the property, after having
performed the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa Śrāddha* (which is done one year after
death).”

The time herein mentioned is that for *division*, nut *succession*. In
fact, for division also there is no such absolute rule that it must be
done after the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*; as it has been declared that ‘separation
among brothers is in view of religious rites;’ and the act of separation
becomes ‘religious,’ when the members separating severally perform
*Śrāddhas* and entertain guests, and so forth. Nor will it be right to
argue that such assertions as ‘the sons shall offer the nine *Śrāddhas*
conjointly’—refers to persons who have finished their studies. Because
it may be that a man, having acquired only a little learning, marries a
wife with a view to guard himself against transgressing the rule of
having intercourse with one’s own wife, to which he would be prone by
excess of sexual desire; but having married, be might devote greater
attention to the studies he had begun, and thus complete his studies
within a year, And it is with reference to such cases that we have the
rule regarding the sons dividing their property after having performed
the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*.

Then again, when a man has lost a wife and is going to marry another,
till he has married again, there would be ‘absence of fire.’ Specially
because, in view of the general law that ‘one should make sacrificial
offerings in the company of his wife,’ which shows that there can be no
setting up of fire for one who has not married.

Such being the case, when Fire is absent, one should place the oblations
in the hands of the Brāhmaṇa—“Of which Brāhmaṇa?”—Of one of those that
have been invited; either of one who has been invited in honour of the
gods, or of some other invited Brāhmaṇa.

As a laudatory description, we have the words—‘*what the Fire is*, &c.’

This is the opinion of those ‘seers of mantras’ who know their
meanings.—(212).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 274, l. 19)—‘*Dvau hi kālau etc*.’—See Gautama 5.
7—‘*Bhāryādiragnirdāyādirvā*.’

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 581) as
laying down the offering of *Homa* into the hand of the Brāhmaṇa. In
this connection it enters into a long discussion. The text speaks of the
‘absence of fire the ‘fire’ meant here must be the *Śrauta* and *Gṛhya*
fires. *Absence* again is of three kinds: ‘previous absence,’
‘destruction,’ and ‘absolute absence there is ‘previous absence’ of fire
prior to one’s entering the ‘Household’;—after the man has entered the
Household, if the fire goes out, either through carelessness, or through
the break up of the Household, there is ‘destruction’ of fire, which can
be resusciated by being set up again, or by the resumption of the
Household;—there is ‘absolute absence’ of fire in the case of the
Life-long Student, who never marries, and therefore never sets up either
the *Śrauta* (Sacrificial) or the *Gṛhya* (Domestic) fire. It is only in
the case of the first two kinds of ‘absence’ of the

Sacrificial and Domestic fires, that it being impossible to set up the
Fire at the time of offering the *Śrāddha*, the *Homa* should be offered
into the hands and such other receptacles as have been prescribed.—Some
people have held that *Homa* can be offered into the *ordinary* fire
also; but according to this view there could be no ‘absence of fire,’ as
the *ordinary fire* can always be set up without difficulty; so that
there would be no occasion for advantage being taken of the permission
to offer the *Homa* into the hand or other receptacles; and this would
render the present text, and others similar to it, entirely futile. All
this points to the conclusion that the Homa at Śrāddha should never be
offered into the *ordinary* fire.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 739) quotes this half of the verse, and
remarks that it refers only to the case of the *Homas* offered by a
Student

It is quoted also in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.237) in support of the view that
the offering of *Homa* into the hand is meant to apply only to the
Case—(1) of the *Śrāddhas* prescribed for the purpose of attaining a
definite end, such as the one laid down to be performed under such lunar
asterisms as *Kṛttikā* and the rest, for the purpose of attaining
heaven,—(2) of the *Ābhyudayika Śrāddha* laid down to be performed on
the occasion of the son’s marriage and such other ceremonies,—(3) of the
*Aṣṭakā Śrāddha*, laid down to be performed on the eighth day of the
month,—and (4) of the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa Śrāddha*.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 316).

The whole verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1337), which has the
following ṅotes:—The second line is a *Hetuvannigada Arthavāda*, the
Brāhanaṇa being eulogised as serving the same purposes as the fire into
which libations are poured,—‘*mantradarśibhiḥ*’, ‘by those learned in
the Veda.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.8.5-6).—‘If permitted, then, it may be
offered into the hands; Agni being the mouth of the Gods and the hand
being the mouth of the Pitṛs,—so says the Brāhmaṇa-text.’

*Jātūkarṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 739).—‘In the absence of the fire, it
should be offered into the right hand of the Brāhmaṇa. That is regarded
as the period of *absence of fire* while one has not taken to a wife,’

*Gṛhyakāra* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 739).—‘The *Anvaṣṭakā*, the monthly
*Pārvaṇa*, the Śrāddha for obtaining specific reward, the auspicious
Iṣṭi, and the unitary Śrāddha; at the first four of these, the man with
the fire shall offer oblations into the fire; and at the latter four, in
the hands of the Brāhmaṇas invited for the sake of the Pitṛs.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	But if no (sacred) fire (is available), he shall place (the offerings) into the hand of a Brahmana; for Brahmanas who know the sacred texts declare, 'What fire is, even such is a Brahmana.'
</details>
