+++
title = "216 न्युप्य पिण्डांस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Self-controlled, he should, after having offered those balls on Kuśa-blades, according to rule, wipe that hand on those same (Kuśa-blades), for the sake of the “Partakers of Smearings.”—(216)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**न्युप्य** दत्त्वा **दर्भेषु तान् पिण्डान् तं हस्तं निर्मृज्याद् दर्भेषु** तेषु येष्व् एव पिण्डनिर्वपणं कृतम् । स्मृत्यन्तरदर्शनात्, दर्भमूलेषु मार्जनम् । 

- <u>अपरे</u> च न हस्तसंलग्नस्यान्नस्योदकस्यैव[^३८१] दर्भेषु संश्लेषणम् । यदि न किंचिद् अपि हस्ते संश्लिष्येत् तथापि हस्तं दर्भेषु निमृज्याद् एव । न ह्य् एतत् प्रतिपत्तिकर्मैव । येनासति वचनप्रयोजने न क्रियेत[^३८२] । नेह श्रूयते "हस्तलग्नं निर्मृज्यात्" किं तर्हि हस्तम् एव ।


[^३८२]:
     M G: kriyate


[^३८१]:
     M G 1st ed.: -dakasya vā

- <u>ननु</u> च **लेपभागिनाम्** इति स्रूयते । तत्रासति लेपे न प्राप्नोति । अतः किम् उच्यते "यदि न किंचिद् अपि हस्ते संश्लिष्येत् तथापि कर्तव्यम्" इति । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । साक्षात् मूर्तम् अन्नं कदाचिन् न श्लिष्यति । पिण्डेष्व् अनुवर्त्यमानेषु अन्नरस उष्मावसंपर्कात् संक्रामति[^३८३] हस्ते । स एव लेप उच्यते । 


[^३८३]:
     G 1st ed: uṣmā ca saṃkrāmati; G 2nd ed.: uṣmā vā saṃkrāmati; M omits: saṃkrāmati

- **लेपभागिनाम्** इति षष्ठी निर्मार्जनस्य तत्संबन्धिताम् आह । न च लेपभागिनः प्रत्यक्षदृश्याः सन्ति येषां स्वस्वाम्यादिसंबन्धो लेपस्य क्रियेत । तस्माऌ लेपभागिनाम् अयं भागो ऽस्त्व् इति मनसा ध्यायेत । शब्देन वोद्दिशेत् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु प्रपितामहात् पूर्वे ये पितरस् तान् लेपभागिन आहुः । अस्मिन् दर्शने प्रपितामहपित्रे प्रपितामहपितामहायेत्यादिभिः शब्दैर् उद्देशः कर्तव्यो ऽसति तन्नामनिवेदने । 

- **हस्तम्** इत्य् एकवचननिर्देशाद् एकेनापसव्येन हस्तेन पिण्डनिर्वपणं दर्शयति । **प्रयत** इत्य् अनुवादह्, विहितत्वात् । **विधिपूर्वकम्** इति शास्त्रान्तरदृष्टं विधिं परिगृह्णाति । "गन्धमाल्यधूपाच्छादनसिद्धोपहारैः पिण्डं निर्वपेत्" इति शङ्खः । यस् त्व् इह विधिः श्रुतः स स्वमतेनैवोक इति विधिपूर्वकम् इत्य् एतद् अनर्थकम् । तस्माच् छास्त्रान्तरविध्युपसंहारार्थं **विधिपूर्वकम्** इति वचनम् ॥ ३.२०६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Nyupya*’—‘having offered,’—‘*on kuśa-blades*’—he should wipe that hand
*on those* same kuśa-blades,—those same on which the balls have been
offered.

In accordance with the opinion of other *Smṛtis*, the wiping is to be
done on the root-end of the kuśa-blades.

Others have held that this rule does not mean simply that the food and
water attaching to the hand should be so wiped; in fact, even though
nothing may be attached to the hand, yet even the hand itself should be
wiped on the blades. The reason for this is that the act here prescribed
is not in the nature of the ‘disposal of remnants,’ in which case alone
it could he held to be done only when the stated conditions would be
present. Specially as what is prescribed is, not that ‘one should wipe
*what is attaching to the hand*,’ but that ‘he should wipe the *hand*.’

Against this it might be argued that—“we find it stated that the act is
‘for the sake of the Partakers of Smearings,’ which shows that it cannot
be done when there is no ‘smearing’ at all. Why, then, should it be said
that, even when there is nothing sticking to the hand, the act should be
done?”

The answer to this is as follows:—It is possible that solid food may not
stick to the hand; but when the ball of food is being rolled up, the
juices of the food are sure to stick to the hand, by reason of the
contact with heat; and it is this that is called the ‘*smearing*.’

The genitive ending in ‘*lepabhāginām*’ connotes the connection of the
act of *wiping* with the particular class of Pitṛs. Any such beings as
‘Partakers of Smearings’ are not visible to the eye; hence it is not
possible to bring about their ‘possession’ in connection with the
‘smearing.’ Hence, all that is meant is that ‘one should think in his
mind that the smearing is meant to be the share of the ‘Partakers of
Smearings;’ or, he may even say this in so many words.

Others have held that ancestors above the great grandfather are spoken
of as ‘Partakers of Smearings.’ According to this view, if the names of
those ancestors are not pronounced, they may be referred to by means of
such expressions as ‘this to the father of my great-grandfather,’ ‘this
to the grandfather of my great-grandfather,’ and so forth.

The singular number in ‘*hand*’ shows that the ball is to be offered
with a single hand in the ‘*apasavya*’ form.

‘*Self-controlled*’—this is a mere reiteration: such control having been
already prescribed above.

‘*According to rule*’—refers to the rules of procedure laid down in
other scriptures; *e.g*., Śaṅkha says—‘One should offer the ball along
with sandal-paint, garlands, incense, doth and dressings.’ The ‘rule’
that has been prescribed in the text by Manu himself has been stated in
his own words; hence the phrase, ‘according to rule,’ would be
meaningless (if it referred to that rule itself). It is for this reason
that this phrase should be taken as summing up the details prescribed in
other scriptures.—(216).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 601), without comment;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 754) as laying down what should be done
after the offering of the Balls has been made;—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
177), which explains that the ‘*Lepabhāginaḥ*,’ ‘Partakers of smearings’
are the ancestors, the great-great-grandfather, his father and his
grandfather;—one’s own father, grandfather and great-grandfather being
called ‘*pīṇḍabhāginaḥ*’;—the same explanation is repeated by the same
work on p. 239.

It is evidently a misprint in Buhler’s note where he includes the
‘great-grandfather’ under the ‘*lepabhāginaḥ*’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 507);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p.
1449), which has the following notes:—‘*Nyupya*’, having deposited on
the kuśa-grass,—‘*prayataḥ*’ with proper care,—such care as implies
concentration of mind, freedom from forgetfulness and so forth; in fact
it stands for the entire procedure,—‘*vidhipūrvakam*’ refers to rules
prescribed in ordinances other than those of Manu himself,—‘*teṣu
darbheṣu*’, those kuśa-blades upon which the Balls have been
deposited,—‘*tam*’, that hand by which the Ball has been
offered—‘*lepabhāginaḥ*’ *i.e*., intended for those Pitṛs who are
entitled to the ‘smearings’ *i*. *e*., the four ancestors, above the
great-grandfather;—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 190).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (73.22).—‘The hand should be rubbed over the root-end of the
kuśa-blades, with the mantra *atra pitaro mādayadhvam*

*Vyāghra* (Aparārka, p. 507).—‘The smearing of the hand one should wipe
at the root-end of the kuśa.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

216	Having offered those cakes according to the (prescribed) rule, being pure, let him wipe the same hand with (the roots of) those blades of Kusa grass for the sake of the (three ancestors) who partake of the wipings (lepa).
</details>
