+++
title = "220 ध्रियमाणे तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

While his father holds, one should make the offering to the previous ancestors; or, he may feed his own father at the Śrāddha as a Brāhmana.—(220).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं "पितृभ्यः पिण्डान् निर्वपेत्" इति । क एते पितरो नाम । अनेकार्थो हि पितृशब्दो जनयितरि वर्तते । जनकः पितेति संबन्धिशब्दो दृश्यते । पूर्वप्रमीताः पित्रादयो ऽन्ये च संबन्धिनः प्रेताः पितर उच्यन्ते । तथा च "नमो वः पितरः" इत्यादिमन्त्रा बहुवचनान्ताः समर्था निगदा भवन्ति । अत एव स्त्रीश्राद्धे नोह्यन्ते । नमस् ते मातर् नमस् ते पतामही इत्यादि न क्रियते । अत एकोद्दिष्टे संख्योहः क्रियते, न प्रातिपदिकोहः । तथा च सूत्रकारः- "एकवन् मन्त्रान् ऊहेत" इत्यादि । "नमस् ते पितर्" इत्य् एवम् ऊहः क्रियते । यो भ्रातुः पितामहादेर् वा एकोद्दिष्टं करोति स चैवम् ऊहति- नमस् ते भ्रातः,[^३८७] नमस् ते पितामह, नमस् ते पितृव्येत्यादि । पितृव्यादीनाम् अनपत्यानां श्राद्धं विहितम् । "यो यत आददीत स तस्मै दद्यात्" इति । देवताविशेषवचनो ऽप्य् अस्ति पितृशब्दः कूटस्थनित्ये ऽर्थे वर्तते । निरुक्तकारा हि दैवते मध्यस्थान् पितॄन् समामनन्ति "मरुतः रुद्राक्षभृतः पितरः" इति । 


[^३८७]:
     M G omit: namas te bhrātaḥ

- एवम् अनेकार्थे पितृशब्दे विशेषावधारणार्थम् आह । **ध्रियमाणे** जीवति **पितरि** सति **पूर्वेषां** पितामहप्रपितामहतत्पितॄणां **निर्वपेत्**, त्रयाणां, बहुवचननिर्देशात् । तथा च गृह्ये- "येभ्यः पिता दद्यात् तेभ्यः पुत्रो दद्यात् पितापुत्रौ चेद् आहिताग्नी स्याताम्" इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> च न चतुर्थं पिण्डो गच्छतीयाहुः ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । नैवात्र चतुर्थः पिण्डो दीयते । 

- पक्षान्तरम् आह **विप्रवद् वा** । यथा ब्राह्मणा[^३८८] निमन्त्रणापूर्वकं ब्रह्मचारिणो नियमवण्तश् च पूज्यन्ते, तथैव जीवत्पितृकेण पिता भोजनीयः । **श्राद्धं** स्राद्धर्थम् अन्नं स्राद्धम् । 


[^३८८]:
     M G: brāhmaṇa

- अत्र च पितृत्वम् एव भोज्यत्वे करणं न जातिगुणाव् अपेक्ष्यौ । एवं ह्य् आहुः- पितृप्रीत्यर्थं श्राद्धम्, तत्र मृतस्य प्रीतौ कर्तव्यायां को जीवति पितरि परिभवो येनासौ न भोजयेत्[^३८९] । 


[^३८९]:
     M G: bhojyet

- **स्वकम्** इत्य् अनुवादः, संबन्धिशब्दत्वाद् एव सिद्धेः ।

- भोजनम् अत्र पितुश् चोदितं हितम्[^३९०], पिण्डनिर्वपणं तु दर्भेषु पितॄणां कर्तव्यम् एतत् त इति विरोधात् । यदि हि पात्रस्थानीया दर्भास् तदा जीवतः पितुः स्वाम्ये दानोत्पत्तौ अल्पिकां मात्राम् आशयेद् इति न युज्यते । जीवतो हि स्वम् इच्छाविनियोज्यम् । न च तस्मिन् पिण्डे ऽञ्जनादिदानम्[^३९१] उपपद्यते अर्धजरतीयप्रसङ्गात् । न ह्य् अत्राञ्जनादिसंस्कृतेन पितुः किंचित् प्रयोजनम् अस्ति । तस्माद् अदृष्टार्थम्[^३९२] अञ्जनादिदानम् । अञ्जनादिरहितं तु कदाचिद् आत्मनः पितुः परस्य वा भोजनयोग्यं भवतीत्य् एवम् अर्धजरतीयम् । तस्माद् अस्मिन् पक्षे पिण्डनिर्वपणं द्वयोः पितामहप्रपितामहयोः । गृह्यकारास् तु स्मरन्ति- "जीवत्पितृकस्य न पिण्डपितृयज्ञो न श्राद्धम्", किं तर्हि "अनारम्भ एव तस्य कर्मणो होमान्तता वा" ॥ ३.२१० ॥


[^३९२]:
     M G: dṛṣṭārtham


[^३९१]:
     J: piṇḍe ujjanādi


[^३९०]:
     M G 1st ed: pitṛbhyo hitam
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said that ‘one shall offer balls to the Pitṛs.’ Now the
question arises—Who are these ‘*Pitṛs?*’ The term ‘*pitṛ*’ has several
meanings, and denotes ‘progenitor’; (A) it is used in the sense of the
relative term, ‘father’; (B) it is also used in the sense of one’s
father and other relations that have died before. It is in this latter
sense that we have the term used in the *plural* in all such
*Nigada-mantras* as ‘*namo vaḥ pitaraḥ*, &c.’. It is for the same
reason, again, that at the Śrāddha offered to females, these mantras do
not undergo transmutation into the form ‘*namo vo mātaraḥ*, &c.;’ on the
same grounds, again, at the the *Śrāddha* offered to a single person, it
is only the *number* that is changed, not the *basic noun* (pitṛ). Says
the author of the *Sutra* also—‘Mantras should be transformed only in
regard to the singular number;’ the transformed words being—‘*namaste
pitaḥ*.’ Similarly, he who performs the unitary Śrāddha of his brother
or grandfather, uses the *mantra* in the form ‘*namaste bhrātaḥ*,’
‘*namaste pitāmaha*,’ ‘*namaste pitṛvya*,’ and so forth. The offering of
*Śrāddha* to one’s childless uncle has been enjoined as necessary, in
such passages as—‘what one receives from another that he shall give unto
him.’ (C) Further, the term ‘*pitṛ*’ also denotes a particular Deity;
and in this sense, it would stand for an unchanging eternal being. In
fact, the author of the *Nirukta*, in the Daivata Section of the work,
gives the name ‘*Pitṛ*,’ to the divine Beings occupying the Middle
Regions, describing them as ‘*Pitṛs*, the Maruts bearing the rosary of
beads.’

The term ‘*pitṛ*,’ thus having several meanings, the Text proceeds to
specify what is meant by it in the present context.

‘*While his father holds*,’—is alive—‘*one should make the offering to
the previous ancestors*,’—‘*i.e*., to the three, the grandfather, the
great-grandfather and the father of the latter; that these three are
meant is indicated by the plural number. Says the *Gṛhyasūtra*—‘The son
should offer to those to whom the father offers, if both father and son
are persons who have set up the fire.’

“But they say that the ball does not reach the fourth ancestor.”

True; but, in the case in question, no *fourth* ball is offered.

The text provides another alternative course to be adopted—‘*As a
Brāhmaṇa*, etc.’ That is, Brāhmaṇas, Religious Students and Ascetics are
invited and honoured and worship-pod and fed; and exactly in the same
manner should the father be honoured and fed by one whose father is
still alive ‘*at the Śrāddha*,’—*i.e*., the food cooked for the
*Śrāddha* offerings.

In this case, the fact of the man being his father, is the sole ground
for his being fed; hence it is not necessary to look into his caste and
qualifications. To this end they declare thus:—‘The *Śrāddha* is for the
purpose of giving pleasure to one’s ancestors’;—hence the bringing about
of the pleasure of the dead father being necessary, what harm would
there be in feeding the living father, in view of which he could not be
fed?

‘*Own*’—Is merely reiterative; what is denoted by this being already
connoted by the relative term, ‘father,’ itself.

What is laid down here is the actual *feeding* of the Father; but the
Balls are placed for the Pitṛs on *Kuśa* blades; as otherwise, there
would be an incompatibility with the formula ‘this ball is for you.’ If
the Kusba-blades be regarded as substitutes for the Dish, then, in the
event of the living Father’s possession being brought about (by the act
of offering), it would not be right to make him eat ‘a very small
portion;’ because, for the living person, the eating is to be in
accordance with the eater’s desire. Further, in this case, there would
be no need of pouring water and other things over the ball offered; as
such a process would lead to the undesirable contingency of a ‘hybrid
performance;’ any effect produced by the pouring of water, in this case,
would serve no useful purpose, cither for the man himself or for his
father; so that it could only serve an imperceptible transcendental
purpose; on the other hand, if water were not poured over the ball, it
might be fit for being eaten either by the father, or by the offerer
himself, or by some one else. It is in this way that the act may turn
out to be of a ‘hybrid’ character.

For these reasons, it follows that, in this alternative, the *ball* is
to be offered to only two persons, the grandfather and the
great-grandfather.

The authors of the Gṛhyasūtras, however, declare that—‘for one whose
father is alive there is neiher *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*, nor *Śrāddha*;—there
is either non-performance of these rites, or their performance only up
to the stage of pouring libations into fire.’—(220)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 542), which explains
‘*pūrveṣām*’ as ‘the three beginning with the grandfather’. Hopkins is
not right when he says that “in this case he offers of course only two
Balls.”

The first half is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 361), in support of the
view that the Ball should be offered to the Father’s father, grandfather
and great-grandfather.

The verse is quoted in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 553), which has the
following notes;—‘*Pūrveṣām*,’ the *father’s* forefathers; another
alternative is that the living Father should be respectfully fed and
then Śrāddha offered to the next two ancestors, *i.e*., the grandfather
and the greatgrandfather.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (75.1).—‘If one performs the Śrāddha while his father is alive,
he shall offer it to those whom his father offers it.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

220	But if the (sacrificer's) father is living, he must offer (the cakes) to three remoter (ancestors); or he may also feed his father at the funeral sacrifice as (one of the) Brahmana (guests).
</details>
