+++
title = "231 यद् यद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whatever may be agreeable to the Brāhmaṇas, that he shall give ungrudgingly. He shall relate stories told in the Veda; as this is liked by the Pitṛs.—(231)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यद् यद्** अन्नं व्यञ्जनं पानं चाभिलषेयुस् **तत् तद्** **अमत्सरः** अलुब्धो **दद्यात्** । मत्सर इति लोभनाम । **रोचेत** प्रीतिं जनयेत् । **ब्रह्मोद्याः ।** ब्रह्मणि वेदे या उद्यन्ते कथ्यन्ते ता **ब्रह्मोद्याः** देवासुरयुद्धं वृत्रवधः सरमाकृत्यम्[^३९९] इत्याद्याः । अथ वा "कः स्विद् एकाकी चरति" (व्स् २३.९) इत्यादि । "ब्रह्माद्याश्[^४००] च कथाः" इति पाठः । तत्प्रधानमन्त्रार्थनिरूपणाद्याः कथाः संलापा लौकिकैः शब्दैः । **पितॄणाम् एतद् ईप्सितम्** अभिलषितम् इत्य् अर्थवादः ॥ ३.२२१ ॥


[^४००]:
     M G: brahmodyaṃ


[^३९९]:
     M G: saramādūtyam
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Whatever food, vegetable or drink they may ask for,—all this he shall
give ‘*ungrudgingly*’—without the least hesitation or covetousness. The
term ‘*matsara*’ stands here for *avarice*.

‘*Be agreeable to*’—*i.e*., cause pleasure to.

‘*Told in the Veda*’—those that are related in the Veda; such, *e.g*.,
as the story of the war between the gods and demons, that of the death
of Vṛttra, the doings of Saramā, and so forth. Or, it may stand for such
stories as ‘*Kaḥ svidekākī charati*,’ etc. (Vājasaneya Saṃhitā, 23.9).

Another reading is ‘*brahmādyāśca kathāḥ*’—*i.e*., discourses, in
ordinary language, upon the meaning of mantras bearing upon Brahman.

‘*This is liked by the Pitṛs*;’—this is a commendatory supplement.—(231)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Brahmodyāḥ kathāḥ*’—Buhler does not represent Medhātithi quite
rightly: The explanation that he attributes to him, ‘riddles from the
Veda’, is not found in Medhātithi at all. Medhātithi’s *first*
explanation is—‘stories related in the Veda’;—the *second* alternative
proposed is ‘such Vedic texts as the one contained in 23.9 of the
Vājasaneya Saṃhitā’;—and the third explanation, ‘discourses, inordinary
language, on the meaning of Mantras bearing upon Brāhmaṇ’, is offered as
that of the reading ‘*Brahmodyāḥ kathāḥ*’. It will thus be seen that
‘riddles from the Veda’ are not found in Medhātithi at all. It is the
third explanation apparently that has misled Buhler. Hopkins has quoted
Medhātithi correctly.

This verse is quoted in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 546);—in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 158);—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1027),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Brahmodyāḥ*’, stories that are related
by the Brāhmaṇa, such as accounts of the war between the Gods and the
Asuras, of the killing of Vṛttra, of Saramā and so forth,—or it may
refer to such texts as ‘*Kaścidekāki charati* etc.’; ‘*Brahmādyāḥ*’ is
another reading, which means—‘Those mantras and Arthavāda texts which
deal with Brahman’; ‘*Kathāḥ*’, conversations in the ordinary language
should be carried on, in connection with the said subjects;—‘*this is
liked by the Pitṛs*’—this is *Arthavāda*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (1.240).—‘Free from anger and without hurry, one shall
offer such food as may be desired and *pure*—reciting the *Pavitra*
mantras till complete satisfaction.’

*Laghu-Āśvalāyana* (23.68).—‘After the Brāhmaṇas have eaten to their
heart’s content, he shall pronounce the Gāyatrī.’

*Varūha-purāṇa* (Caturvarga-cintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p. 1388).—‘The offerer
having offered food, clean, profuse and carefully prepared,—he should
politely say —*please fall* *to*.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 423).—‘So long as the food is pure, so long
as what is desired is offered, and so long as the offerer does not say
*I give*,—so long do the Pitṛs partake of the food.’

*Sumantu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 424).—‘Without anger, he shall offer to
each such dishes as he may relish; they should be fed till they are
fully satisfied; and he shall not selfishly keep back any food.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

231	Whatever may please the Brahmanas, let him give without grudging it; let him give riddles from the Veda, for that is agreeable to the manes.
</details>
