+++
title = "236 अत्युष्णं सर्वम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

All the food should be very hot, and they should eat with controlled speech; when asked by the giver, the Brāhmaṇas should not describe the qualities of the sacrificial food.—(236)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उष्णम् एव **अत्युष्णम्** अतिगतम् उष्णम् इति । प्रपतितपर्णः प्रपर्ण इति यथा । **सर्वम् अन्नं** गुणाश् च । यस्योष्णस्य भोजनम् उचितं तत्रैवेदम् उष्णताविधानम्, न तु दध्योदनादेः, यत् तद् उष्णम् अप्रीतिकरं व्याधिजनकं च । तत्र "हर्षयेद् ब्राह्मणान्" (म्ध् ३.२२३) इति विरुध्येत । 

- उष्णभोजनविधानाच् च न सकृत् सर्वम् अन्नं परिवेष्टव्यम् । तथा हि बहुभोजिनां शीतं भवेद् अन्नम् । तस्माद् भुक्ते पुनर् दद्यात् । न च भुञ्जानेभ्य उच्छिष्टत्वात्[^४०४] दानम् अयुक्तम् इति वाच्यम् । भोजनविधिर् एवंरूप एव । आ टृप्तेर् भोजयितुर् व्यापारः । न ह्य् अत्रौदनादि प्रतिग्राह्यतया संबध्यते । अत एव न तत्र प्रतिग्रहमन्त्र ओदनादिषु प्रयुज्यते । 


[^४०४]:
     M GL ucchiṣṭadānatvāt

- **वाग्यताः** वाक् यता नियमिता यैः । छान्दसः परनिपातः । वाचा वा यताः । साधनं कृतेति समासः । कर्तृवचनश् च तदा यतशब्दः व्यापारनिषेधो नियमनम्, वाचश् च व्यापारः शब्दोच्चारणम्, तत्प्रतिषेधः क्रियते । व्यक्ताव्यक्तशब्दोच्चारणं न कर्तव्यम् । **हविषो गुणा** न च वक्तव्याः । "इष्टैः सद्भिर् भुञ्जानैर् दात्रे न विवक्षितम्" इति स्मरन्ति ।

- <u>ननु</u> वाङ्नियमाद् एवैतत् सिद्धम् ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । अभिनयादिनापि[^४०५] न कर्तव्यम् । ब्रूविः प्रतिपादने वर्तते । **ब्रूयुर्** इति न शब्दोच्चारणम् एव ॥ ३.२२६ ॥


[^४०५]:
     M G 1st ed.: api bhayādināpi; G 2nd ed.: abhinayādir api
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Atyuṣṇa*,’ ‘very hot,’ stands for ‘hot;’ the term being expounded as
‘*atigatam uṣṇam*,’ ‘with heat developed;’ just as ‘*praparṇa*’ stands
for ‘*prapatitaparṇa*,’ ‘that of which the leaves have fallen.’

‘*All*’—*i.e*., the food as well as the seasonings.

This injunction regarding ‘being hot’ applies to only those things which
ought to be eaten hot, and not to rice cooked in curd and such things,
which, when eaten hot, are disagreeable and harmful; and this would be
contrary to what has been said before regarding ‘bringing delight to the
Brāhmaṇas.’

In view of the injunction of eating hot food, the entire quantity should
not be served at once; as, in that case, for persons who eat much, it
would become cold. Hence, as the food is eaten little by little, more
should be given. It will not be right to argue that “the food out of
which a part has been served becomes a ‘remnant,’ and it would not be
right to serve it as such;” because the rule regarding feeding is that
the action of the eater extends till his complete satisfaction. Further,
the Rice and other things do not come in, in the act of feeding, as
‘gifts to be received;’ that is why there is no reciting of mantras
connected with the receiving of gifts, over the Rice and other articles
of food.

‘*With controlled speech*’—*i.e*., having their speech under full
control; the reversed order of the two terms of the compound is an
archaism. Or, the compound ‘*vāgyatāḥ*’ may be expounded as ‘*vacā
yatāḥ*,’ ‘controlled of speech;’ the compound in this case being in
accordance with Pāṇini’s aphorism, ‘*Sādhanam kṛtā*’; and, in this
sense, the term ‘*yataḥ*’ would have the sense of the active
past-participle. ‘Control’ means *stopping of operation*; and the
‘operation’ of ‘speech’ is *uttering of words*; and it is this latter
that is prohibited; the meaning being that no words, distinct or
indistinct, shall be uttered.

Nor are the qualities of the food to be described. It has been declared
that ‘excellent and well-behaved people, while taking food, shall not
speak to the giver.’

“This injunction is already implied by that relating to the control of
speech.”

True; what is meant by the second injunction is that it should not be
done by gestures even; the root ‘*brū*’ denotes *describing*; so that
the word ‘*brūyuḥ*’ does not necessarily mean *articulate
utterance*.—(236)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 748), which
explains that the addition of the particle ‘*eva*’ is meant to emphasise
that ‘they should not give up eating, even though they may happen to
touch one another.’

The second half of the verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 497);—in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 170), which says that this verse forbids the
praising of the food even by means of gestures;—and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 553), which adds the same note.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.236-237)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (71.19).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.29).—\[Do.\]

But in both the reading is ‘*uṣṇam*’ for ‘*uṣmā*.’

*Śāṅkha* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 749).—‘If he describes the excellences of
the food...he destroys the Śrāddha and becomes degraded.’

*Śāṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 497).—‘The Brāhmaṇas shall not describe,
praise or decry the food. They should say nothing except by the gesture
of the hand. The Pitṛs partake of the food only so long as it is on the
ground, until it is praised, and so long as it is hot, except in the
case of fruits, roots and drinks.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

236	All the food must be very hot, and the (guests) shall eat in silence; (even though) asked by the giver (of the feast), the Brahmanas shall not proclaim the qualities of the sacrificial food.
</details>
