+++
title = "264 प्रक्षाल्य हस्ताव्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having washed the hands and sipped water, he should make offerings to his paternal relations; and having treated his paternal relations well, he should feed his other relations also.—(264)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पिण्डेषु प्रतिपादितेषु तौ हस्तौ प्रक्षालयेत् । ततः आचमनविधिं कुर्यात् । ज्ञातीन् प्रैति गच्छति प्राप्नोतीति **ज्ञातिप्रायं** कुर्यात् । **ज्ञातिभ्यो** दद्यात् । तेभ्यः **सत्कृतं** **दत्वा** बान्धवेभ्यो ऽपि दद्यात् । ज्ञातयः सगोत्राः मातृश्वशुरपक्षा बान्धवाः ।

- <u>अत्र</u> चोच्यते- यद् उक्तम् "यथा ब्रूयुस् तथा कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ३.२४३) इति । यदि तैर् उक्तम् "गृहान् अस्मदीयान् एतद् अन्नं प्राप्यताम्" इति, तदा वैश्वदेवहोमादीनां का गतिः । 

- <u>पाकान्तरं</u> कर्तव्यम् । अथ वादृष्टार्थम् एवान्नशेषनिवेदनं नित्यवद् आम्नायते । शेषम् अन्नम् इत्य् उक्ते इष्टेभ्य[^४८३] इति ब्रूयुर् इति, पाक्षिकं चैतत् स्याद् यदि ते गृह्णीयुः ॥ ३.२५४ ॥


[^४८३]:
     M G 1st ed.: ukte 'dṛṣṭebhya
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The balls having been disposed of, he should wash his hands; and then
follow the rules regarding sipping of water.

‘*Jñatiprāyam*’—is to be explained as ‘that which goes to (*praiti*) to
the paternal relations (*jñātiṣu*);’ this he should make; *i.e*., he
should offer food to them.

‘*Having treated than well*, *he should feed other relations*.’ Those
belonging to the same ‘*gotra*’ are called ‘*jñati*,’ ‘paternal
relations,’ while those related on the mother’s and the wife’s side are
called ‘*bāṇḍhava*,’ ‘releations.’

The following question is here raised:—

“It has been said above (in verse 253) that ‘he should do us they tell
him;’ now if they were to tell him, ‘Send all this food to our home,’
then, what would become of the *Vaiśvadeva* and other oblations?”

In that case, the man will have to cook food again. Or, the offering of
the remnant to the Brāhmaṇas may be regarded as being prescribed only
with a view to some transcendental result,—and not with a view to their
actually taking it all away. For instance, it has been laid down that —‘
When informed of food having been left, they should say *it is for your
friends*;’ and this direction would have to be regarded as only
optional, if, in certain cases, the Brāhmaṇas were to take away the
food.—(264)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

There is nothing in Medhātithi to show that he reads ‘*pūjayet*’ for
‘*bhojayet*’, as stated by Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 512), which explains ‘*Jñāti*’ as
‘relations on the father’s side’, and ‘*bāndhava*’ as ‘relations on the
mother’s side’;—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1515), which has the
following notes:—‘*Jñāti*’ are relations on the father’s side, *i.e*.,
Sapiṇḍas;—the remnant of the food cooked for the *Śrāddha* should be
made to reach those; *i.e*., they should be fed with it with due
respect; after which one should honour the ‘*Bāndhavas*,’ *i.e*.,
relations on the mother’s and the wife’s side; if, however, on being
asked ‘what shall be done with the remnant?’—the Brāhmaṇas should say
‘give it to us’—then other food should be cooked for the relations; and
these are to be fed with the remnant, only if so permitted by the
Brāhmaṇas. It may be regarded as incumbent on the Brāhmaṇas to give this
permission.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghu-Āśvalāyana* (23.70).—‘Having obtained the permission of the
Brāhmaṇas, he shall eat the remnants, along with his friends.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Caturvargacintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p. 1394).—‘On being asked
what shall be done with the food left over, they shall say that it
should be given to gentlemen.’

*Devala and Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Having washed his hands and sipped
water, he shall feed his paternal relations with the remnants; and after
the paternal relations have been satisfied, he shall feed his servants.’

*Āditya-Purāṇa* (Do.).—‘Sisters and relations should be entertained at
Śrāddhas; the poverty-stricken, the meek, one with deficient limbs, one
with redundant fingers, those whose birth has been fruitless, those
disgusted and those struck by disease,—all these deserve to be fed.
Bards and Māgadhas, charioteers, dancers and singers, those who have not
got at the Śrāddha what they desired,—these people destroy all fame;
therefore these also should be fed.’

*Śātātapa* (Do.).—‘What food is left over, he shall himself eat with the
permission of the Brāhmaṇas,—along with his friends.’

*Bhaviṣyottara* (Do.).—‘With speech controlled, he shall eat the
remnants, along with his friends.’

*Padmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Calm and quiet, he shall eat the remnant.’

*Uśanas* (Do.).—‘Permitted by them, he shall make over the remnant to
his friends and eat it himself.’

*Varāhapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘He shall eat it, along with his relations and
servants and also his friends and other relations.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Then, at the end of the Vaiśvadeva-offering,
along with his servants, sons and relations, and accompanied by guests,
he shall eat all that had been offered to the Pitṛs.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

264	Having washed his hands and sipped water, let him prepare (food) for his paternal relations and, after giving it to them with due respect, let him feed his maternal relatives also.
</details>
