+++
title = "274 अपि नः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘May there be one in our family, who may offer milk-rice mixed with honey and butter on the thirteenth, and when the shadow of the elephant falls towards the east.’—(274)


yadenduḥ pitṛdaivatye haṃsaścaiva kare sthitaḥ | 
yāmyāṃ tithirbhavetsāhi gajacchāyā prakīrtitā ||
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रकृतां त्रयोदशीं वर्षादिगुणयुक्ताम् अधिकृत्येदम् उच्यते । एवं पितर आशास्ते । अस्मकं **कुले भूयात्** **स** तादृशो जायताम् उत्कृष्टगुणः यः प्रागुक्तायां **त्रयोदश्याम्** अस्मभ्यं **दद्यात् पायसं** **मधुसर्पिः**संयुक्तम् । तथा **कुञ्जरस्य** हस्तिनः **प्राक्छाये** प्राच्यां दिशि गतायां छायायाम्, अपराह्णेतरे काल इत्य् अर्थः । शेषे ऽहनि हस्तिनो दीर्घा प्राची छाया भवति । "प्राक्छायाम्" इति वा पाठः । छायायां हि ब्राःमणा भोज्यन्ते । अग्रिमं कर्म तु यद्य् अल्पत्वाच् छायायां न संभवति, तद्देशान्तरे तत्समीपे कर्तव्यम् । अङ्गत्वात् सति संभवे तत्सर्वाङ्गोपेतं प्रधानं हस्तिछायायाम् एव । 

- <u>यत् तु</u> व्याचक्षते- ग्रहोपरागो हस्तिछायोच्यते । "हस्ती वै भूत्वा स्वर्भानुर् आसुरिर् आदित्यं तमसाविध्यत्" (च्ड़्। प्ब् १४.११.१४) इति 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । तत्र हि गौणो हस्तिशब्दप्रयोगः । स्मृत्यन्तरे च पृथग् एव हस्तिछाया ग्रहोपरागाद् आम्नाता "हस्तिछाया ग्रहणं चन्द्रसूर्ययोः" (य्ध् १.२१८) इति ॥ ३.२६४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is said here is with reference to the thirteenth day of the month
spoken of above, as accompanied by the rainy season and the asterism of
*Maghā*.

What is described in the text is the wish expressed by the Pitṛs.

‘*May there be*’—born—‘*in our famity*’—one such person, endowed with
excellent qualities, who may offer to us, on the said thirteenth day,
‘*milk-rice mixed with honey and butter*;’—also ‘*when the shadow of the
elephant falls towards the east*;’ *i.e*., during the afternoon; towards
the close of day, the shadow cast by the elephant is long and falls
towards the East.

Another reading for ‘*prākchāyā*’ is ‘*prākchāyām*;’ it is in a shady
place that Brāhmaṇas are fed; as for the rest of the rite, if the shade
is not enough to permit of its being done there, then it should be done
in a place close to the shadow. Since the details form part of the rite,
the whole of it should, as far as possible, be performed in the shadow
of the elephant.

Some people have explained the term ‘shadow of the elephant’ to mean
‘eclipse,’ adding that Rāhu takes the shape of the elephant and pierces
the sun with darkness.

But this is not right; as in that case, the term ‘elephant’ will have to
ba regarded as figurative. Further, in another *Smṛti* the ‘elephant’s
shadow’ has been described as something entirely different from
eclipse:—‘the elephant’s shadow, the eclipse of the Sun, and the eclipse
of the Moon’ \[where the three are mentioned as distinct from one
another\].—(274)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Prākchāye kuñjarasya*’—‘In the afternoon, when the shadow cast by the
elephant falls towards the East’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda);—‘daring an eclipse’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi, who rejects
it).—*Mitākṣarā* (on 1.218) quotes a definition by which the name
applies to a particular day—

> yadenduḥ pitṛdaivatye haṃsaścaiva kare sthitaḥ \|  
> yāmyāṃ tithirbhavetsāhi gajacchāyā prakīrtitā \|\|

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 109), which quotes from
*Vāyupurāṇa* a definition of ‘*Gajacchāyā*’ as the 13th day of the month
during which the sun lies in the asterism of Hastā, and the moon in that
of Maghā;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 245);—in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p.
271), which explains ‘*dadyāt*’ as ‘*dadāti*’ and ‘*prākchāye etc*.’ as
‘when the shadow of the elephant is cast towards the East,’ and notes
that this is mere *Arthavāda*;—and in *Vaṛṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 355).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (13.88.12). \[after reproducing the first line of
Manu\].—‘During the asterism of Maghā, during the Southern Sojourn of
the sun, offering milk-preparations mixed with honey and butter.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.37).—‘This person shall offer Śrāddha to us, during ṭhe
rains and during the asterism of Maghā, with honey and meats,
vegetables, milk and milk-preparations.’

*Viṣṇu* (78.52-53).—‘May some one, the best among men, be born in our
family who, during the rains, on the thirteenth day of the brighter
fortnight, perform Śrāddha with honey offered profusely; as also during
the whole month of Kārtika, and when the Elephant’s shadow falls towards
the East.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

274	'May such a man (the manes say) be born in our family who will give us milk-rice, with honey and clarified butter, on the thirteenth lunar day (of the month of Bhadrapada) and (in the afternoon) when the shadow of an elephant falls towards the east.'
</details>
