+++
title = "276 कृष्णपक्षे दशम्यादौ"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘No dates are so commended for the offering of śrāddha as those of the dark fortnight, beginning with the tenth day, leaving out the fourteenth.—(276)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दशम्या**दीनां वचनात् फलातिशयोत्पत्तिः । अन्यास्व् अपि तु सत्यां श्रद्धायां कर्तव्यम् । चतुर्दश्यां तु निषेध एव ॥ ३.२६६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mention of the days beginning with the tenth, indicates that the
offering is attended by excellent results. So that on other days also
the offering is to be made, if due faith is there. But on the fourteenth
day there is absolute prohibition.—(276)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 666) as laying down
what one should do in the event of his being unable to perform the
*Śrāddha* throughout the dark fortnight;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 524),
which remarks that this verse implies also the alternative of beginning
the *Śrāddha* on the *fifth* and going on daily till the *fifteenth*;—in
*Smṛtitattva* (on p. 173, again on p. 252) as forbidding the performance
of *Śrāddha* on the fourteenth,—and again on p. 845 as forbidding the
performance of the *Śrāddha* on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight
of all months;—in *Aparārka* (p. 422), which adds that the alternative
here laid down is that of beginning the performance of the *Śrāddha* on
the tenth day of the fortnight;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 467),
which says that it refers to the *Mahālayā-śrāddha*;—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p, 187) in support of the view that only five, *not
ten*, days of the *kṛṣṇapakṣa* are specially commended, these being the
10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 15th days;—in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p.
6);—in *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p, 350);—in *Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p.
382);—in *Hemādri* (Kāla p. 461), which adds that the fourteenth day is
not to be excluded entirely, it is to be avoided only for the Śrāddha to
three ‘deities’ with the exception of that offered to those killed with
weapons;—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 194).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (15.2-3).—‘Commencing from the fifth day of the Aparapakṣa,
Śrāddha should bo performed;—or on all days.’

*Āpastamba* (2.16.6).—‘So also during the later days of the Aparapakṣa.’

*Kātyāyana and Gautama* (quoted in Caturvargacintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p.
293).—‘One should make the offering to the Pitṛs on the moonless day; or
on the days commencing from the fifth of the *Aparapakṣa*; or according
as he may have faith, on all days, whenever the right substance, place
and Brāhmaṇas may be available.’

*Āpastamba* (quoted in Caturvargacintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p. 194).—‘It should
be offered every month; the afternoon of the Aparapakṣa is highly
commendable, as also the latter days of the Aparapakṣa.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.264).—‘Commencing from the first day, excepting the
fourteenth day; on this latter day it is offered to those who may have
been killed by weapons.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 663).—‘When the sun is in the sign of
Virgo, there are fifteen days, on which the performance of Śrāddha has
been prescribed;—on the first day, for obtaining wealth; on the second,
for obtaining progeny; on the third, for obtaining good things; on the
fourth for destruction of enemies; on the fifth, for obtaining
prosperity; on the sixth, the man obtains honour; on the seventh, the
man becomes leader of his clan; on the eighth, excellent intelligence;
on the ninth he obtains excellent wives; on the tenth, he fulfils all
his desires; on the eleventh, he acquires all the Vedas; on the twelfth,
he obtains gold; by offering it on the thirteenth day, he obtains
children, memory, cattle, sound body, freedom, excellent prosperity,
long-life, power and riches. Those who seek the welfare of those
ancestors who were killed in youth by weapons should offer the Śrāddha
on the fourteenth day. The man offering Śrāddha with food on the
moonless day obtains all that he desires and goes to heaven.’

*Vṛddha-Manu* (Do.).—‘When the sun enters the sign of Virgo, the dark
fortnight is called the *Mahālaya*, as also the *Gajacchāyā*.’

*Śāṭyāyani* (Do., p. 664.).—‘The sixteen days during the month of
Nabhasya, when the sun is in the sign of Virgo, constitute the time for
the performance of Śrāddha.’

*Śāṭyāyani* (Do., p. 665).—‘The sun in Virgo is very sacred; so also is
the fifth fortnight (after Āṣāḍhī).’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 665.).—‘Sixteen days, formed by the first
day of the bright fortnight, which follow the moonless day.’

*Jābāli* (Do., p. 665).—‘During the fifth fortnight following the
full-moon day of Āṣāḍha,—even though the sun may have not entered the
sign of Virgo, one should offer Śrāddha; that fortnight is the most
commended for the performance of Śrāddha.’

*Bṛhat-Manu* (Do.).—‘During the fifth fortnight after the fullmoon day
of the month of Āṣāḍha, the Pitṛs desire food and water every day; hence
Śrāddha should be offered at that time... even though the sun may or may
not have entered the sign of Virgo.’

*Ādityapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Śrāddha is commended even when performed during
other fortnights during the time that the sun is in the sign of Virgo;
if this happens to ho the fifth fortnight (after the full-moon day of
Āṣāḍha), it is all the more commendable.’

*Shloka-Gautama* (Do.).—‘During the time when the sun is in the sign of
Virgo, there are sixteen days that are as good as sacrificial sessions.’

*Kārṣṇājini* (Do.).—‘Whether in the beginning or the middle or the end,
whenever the sun enters the sign of Virgo, the whole of that fortnight
is to be honoured as regards the performance of Śrāddha. During the dark
fortnight of Nabhasya, Śrāddha should he performed every day, not
excepting the Nandā or even the fourteenth day.’

*Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 666).—‘During the dark fortnight
of the month of Nabhasya, one should perform Śrāddha every day, or
during two-thirds, or during one-half, or during one-third of the
fortnight.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 667).—‘During the rains, when the sun is in the sign of
Virgo,—the man shall offer Śrāddha between the fifth day of one
fortnight and the fifth day of another.’

*Sumantu* (Do.).—‘So long as the sun remains in the sign of Virgo and
until he enters the sign of Scorpio, it is time for the offering of
Śrāddha.’

*Purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 667).—‘When the sun enters the sign of
Virgo, Pitṛs come to their descendants; till the entering of the sun
into the sign of Scorpio, the region of Pitṛs becomes empty; and on the
entrance of the sun into Scorpio, they go away disappointed after having
cursed their offspring.’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Do.).—‘During the rainy season the Pitṛs empty their
abodes, and oppressed by hunger, describe their own sins and desire
milk-rice mixed with honey; and hence one should satisfy the Pitṛs with
offerings of milk-rice, mixed with honey, butter and sesamum.’

*Gārgya* (Do., 668).—‘On the *Nandā* days (1st, 6th and 11th of the
month), on Friday and on the thirteenth day, the householder should not
perform Śrāddha.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘On the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight, if one
offers Śrāddha, the death of his eldest son is certain. If one offers
Śrāddha during the asterism of Maghā, his eldest son dies.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Do., p. 669).—‘If one offers Śrāddha on the thirteenth,
he should offer it not to one Pitṛ; he shall offer the Pārvaṇa Śrāddha.’

*Śaṅkha* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 669).—‘On the expiry of the month of
Bhādra, or the thirteenth day in conjunction with the asterism of Maghā,
one should offer Śrāddha with honey and milk-rice; his forefathers
reward him with desirable progeny, fame, heaven, health, and wealth.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.).—‘If a man performs Śrāddha on the thirteenth, no
one in his family ever dies young.’

*Marīci* (Do., p. 670).—‘On the fourteenth, Śrāddha should be offered
only to those who have died through poison, weapons or wild animals, or
those who have killed a Brāhmaṇa; for others that day has been
condemned.’

*Pracetas* (Do.).—‘The fourteenth has been recommended only for those
who died through tree-climbing or iron weapons, or lightning or water or
poison and such things.’

*Sumanta* (Parāśaramadhava, p. 670).—‘Even the Unitary Śrāddha for one
who has died through weapons should be performed on the fourteenth day
of the Mahālaya.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

276	The days of the dark half of the month, beginning with the tenth, but excepting the fourteenth, are recommended for a funeral sacrifice; (it is) not thus (with) the others.
</details>
