+++
title = "277 युक्षु कुर्वन्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Performing (the śrāddha) on the even dates and under the even asterisms, one obtains all desires; and honouring the Pitṛs on the odd ones, he obtains prosperous offspring.—(277)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

युञ्जि दिनानि द्वितीयाचतुर्थ्यादीनि । ऋक्षं नक्षत्रं तानि भरण्यादीनि युञ्जि भवन्ति । प्रतिपत्तृतीयापञ्चमीसप्तमीनवम्यास्[^४९०] तिथयो ऽयुज उच्यन्ते । द्वितीयाचतुर्थीषष्ठ्यष्तमीदशम्यो युजः । एवम् एकादश्ययुक्प्रभृतौ द्रष्टव्यम् नक्षत्रेष्व् अपि । **सर्वान् कामान्** । ते च कामा इतिहासपुरानयोर् भेदेनोपत्ताः । **पुष्कलां प्रजाम्** । धनविद्याबलपुरुषैः पुष्टा पुष्कला ॥ ३.२६७ ॥


[^४९०]:
     M G: -navamyas
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Even dates*’—the second, the fourth, and so forth.

‘*Asterism*’—lunar mansion; ‘*Bharaṇī*,’ and the rest are called ‘even
asterisms.’

The first, the third, the fifth, the seventh and the ninth days of the
month are called ‘*odd*;’ and the second, the fourth, the sixth, the
eighth and the tenth are called ‘*even*.’ Similarly, the eleventh day is
‘odd,’ and so on with the asterisms also.

‘*All desires*,’—the desires being described in detail in *Itihāsas* and
*Purāṇas*.

‘*Prosperous offspring*,’—that which is replete with persons possessed
of wealth, learning and strength, is called ‘*prosperous*.’— (277)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 512), which explains
‘*yukṣu*’ and ‘*ayukṣu*’ as ‘even’ and ‘odd’, res pectively;—and in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 266).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.16.8-22).—‘If one performs the Śrāddha on the
first day, he obtains children most of whom are female; if on the second
day, he obtains children who become thieves; if on the third day, he
obtains children endowed with Brāhmic glory; if on the fourth day, he
obtains cattle of poor quality; if on the fifth day, he obtains male
children, many in number and he does not die childless; if on the sixth
day, his son becomes expert in travelling and in gambling; if on the
seventh, his agriculture prospers; if on the eighth, he obtains sound
health; if on the ninth, he obtains one-hoofed cattle; if on the tenth,
his business prospers; if on the eleventh, he obtains articles of iron
and lead; if on ṭhe twelfth, he obtains much cattle; if on the
thirteenth, he obtains many sons, many friends, beautiful children; if
on the fourteenth, he prospers in weapons; if on the fifteenth, he
obtains prosperty.’

*Viṣṇu* (78.36-49).—‘On the first he obtains house and beautiful wives;
on the second, a girl bestowing benefits; on the third, all desirable
things; on the fourth, cattle; on the fifth, beautiful sons; on the
sixth, success in gambling; on the seventh, success in agriculture; on
the eighth, trade; on the ninth, cattle; on the tenth, horses; on the
eleventh, sons endowed with Brāhmic glory; on ṭhe twelfth gold and
silver; on the thirteenth, good luck; on the fifteenth, all desirable
things.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.262-267).—‘Daughters, sons-in-law, cattle, good sons,
gambling, agriculture, trade, cleft-hoofed cattle, one-hoofed cattle,
sons with Brāhmic glory, gold and silver and other metals, gratified
relatives, all desires;—these are obtained by the man who offers Śrāddha
from the first day onwards, excepting the fourteenth; also heaven,
offspring, glory, bravery, lands, strength, son, honour, good luck,
prosperity, supremacy, sovereignty, trade, freedom from disease, fame,
freedom from sorrow, the supreme state, wealth, Vedas, successful
medication, metal-wealth, cows, goats and sheep, horses, longevity—all
this is obtained by one who offers the Śrāddha in accordance with law.’

*Gautama* (15.4).—‘Or, one may perform the Śrāddha whenever he gets
suitable substances, place and Brāhmaṇas.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

277	He who performs it on the even (lunar) days and under the even constellations, gains (the fulfilment of) all his wishes; he who honours the manes on odd (lunar days) and under odd (constellations), obtains distinguished offspring.
</details>
