+++
title = "282 न पैतृयज्ञियो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The oblation into fire made in connection with the rite in honour of the Pitṛs has not been prescribed as to be offered into the common fire; and for the Brāhmaṇa who has set up the fire, there is no Śrāddha apart from the Moonless day.—(282)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पितृयज्ञाङ्गभूतो **होमः पैतृयज्ञिकः** स **लौकिके** स्मार्ते **ऽग्नौ** **न विधीयते** । शास्त्रेण कर्तव्यतया न चोद्यते । तस्मात् त्रिः संवत्सरस्यानाहिताग्निना कर्तव्यम् । यद्य् अपि त्रिःकृतम् अपि भवत्य् एव कृतं लौकिके ऽग्नौ, तथापि संवत्सरापेक्षया अकृतम् एव तद् भवति । प्रस्थभोजनो हि न्यूने भुक्ते ऽभुक्त इति[^४९३] । अर्थवादतया पूर्वशेषम् इदं पूर्वे व्याचक्षते ।


[^४९३]:
     M G 1st ed.: nyūne bhukte bhavanti vaktāto nāsmābhir atyabhuktam iti; G 2nd ed.: nyūne bhukte 'bhukte iti bhavanti vaktāto nāsmābhir atyabhuktam iti

- इदं तु युक्तम्[^४९४] । यदि लौकिको[^४९५] ऽग्निर् विवाहादाव् अपरिगृहीतस् तस्मिञ् छ्राद्धाङ्गभूतो होमो न कर्तव्य इत्य् उच्यते । होमप्रतिषेधेन च तद्व्यतिरिक्तम् अन्यत् कर्म कर्तव्यम् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । इतरथा परिगृहीताग्नेर् अपि[^४९६] पार्वणश्राद्धाङ्गत्वेन विधानाद् अनग्निकस्य श्राद्धानधिकार एव स्यात् । यथान्धस्याज्यावेक्षणाशक्त्या न दर्शपौर्णमासयोर् अधिकारः[^४९७] । अस्मिंस् तु सति साग्निकस्य होमवत् श्राद्धम् अनग्निकस्य तद्वर्जितम् अपि ज्ञापितं भवति । तथा च "अग्न्यभावे" (म्ध् ३.२०२) इत्य् अस्यायम् एव विषयः ।


[^४९७]:
     M G: (omits na) darśapaurṇamāsayor anadhikāraḥ


[^४९६]:
     M G: homasya


[^४९५]:
     M G: yal laukiko


[^४९४]:
     J: tv ayuktam (but Jha's translation appears to presuppose yuktam)

- <u>ये</u> ऽपि व्याचक्षते पिण्डपितृयज्ञो ऽभिप्रेतः तत्र यो होमः स लौकिके स्मार्ते ऽग्नौ नास्ति, ते ऽपि न युक्तम् आहुः । अस्त्व् एवम्[^४९८] अनाहिताग्निर् नित्यत्वे[^४९९] श्रपयित्वा जुहुयाद् इत्यादि । **न दर्शेण विना श्राद्धं** ग्रहोपरागादाव् आहिताग्निः[^५००] प्रतिषेध इत्य् आहुः । एतत् तु समाचारविरुद्धम् ।


[^५००]:
     M G: āhitāgneḥ


[^४९९]:
     M G: anāhitāgner nitye


[^४९८]:
     M G: asty eva evam

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु पठन्ति- न विना दर्श इत्य् अस्याहिताग्निना[^५०१] मासानुमासिकं कर्तव्यम्, नास्य त्रिःसंवत्सरविधिः । नैवायं पाठो ऽस्तीत्य् <u>अन्ये</u> । 


[^५०१]:
     M G: ata āhitāgninā

- कस् तर्ह्य् अस्यार्थः । दार्शात् श्राद्धाद् अन्यद् आहिताग्नेर् मघाश्राद्धादि न नियमेन भवतीति दार्शम् एव तस्य नियतम् । अनाहिताग्नेस् तु हेमन्तादिविहितान्य् अपि नियतानीति ॥ ३.२७२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘Homa,’ ‘oblation into fire,’ offered in connection with the Rite in
honour of the Pitṛs is called ‘*Paitṛyajñikahoma*;’—this ‘*has not been
prescribed as to be offered into the common*’—*i.e*., the
*Smārta*—‘*fire*.’ That is, the Scriptures do not enjoin it as to be
done in that manner. Hence it follows that the offering of *Śrāddha*
‘three times during the year’ is to be made by one who has not set up
the Fire. Though this offering three times would be ‘offering into the
common Fire,’ yet it would be as good as ‘*not done*,’ in comparison
with what is done throughout the year. For instance, when a man who can
eat a seer has eaten less, people are found to say, ‘he has not eaten.’

Older commentators have explained this as a reiterative supplement to
what has gone in the preceding verse.

The right view to take, however, appears to be that what is said in the
text is that the oblation into Fire, in connection with *Śrāddhas*,
should not be offered into the ‘common Fire,’—*i.e*., such fire as has
not been set up at marriage or other prescribed times. And this
prohibition of the ‘oblation into Fire’ implies that details other than
that may be done in the common fire. If such were not the meaning, then,
in view of the fact that the ‘oblation into fire,’ offered by the person
who has set up the fire, has been prescribed as part of the
*Pārvaṇa-Śrāddha*, the person who has not set up the Fire would not be
entitled to the performance of *Śrāddhas* at all; just as, in view of
the fact that the blind person cannot do the ‘looking into the butter,’
he is not entitled to the performance of the *Darśa Pūrṇamāsa*
sacrifi-ces. If it be, as we have explained it, then it comes to this
that the *Śrāddha* performed by the man who has set up the fire would be
accompanied by oblations into fire, while that performed by one. who has
not set up the fire would be without such oblations. And in this, case,
what is said here falls within what has been said in verse 212 above.

Some people have offered the following explanation:—“What is meant here
is the *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*; and the oblation into fire that is offered at
this is never offered into the Common Fire.”

Others have said that this is not right, for even so the person who has
not set up the Fire might cook the oblation day by day and then offer
it.

Others, again, assert that, in view of the phrase, ‘*apart from the
Moonless Day*,’ it follows that by the person who has set up the Fire
the *Śrāddha* should be offered every month; and that the rule regarding
‘three times in the year’ does not apply to him.

Others, again, have declared that such is not the reading.

What then is the meaning?

The meaning is that, apart from the *Śrāddha* performed on the Moonless
Day, no other *Śrāddha*—such as the ‘*Maghā-Śrāddha*,’ and the like—is
binding upon him; the former alone being necessary for him. For the
person who has not set up the Fire, however, the *Śrāddhas* prescribed
in connection with the winter, etc., also are obligatory.—(282)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* on p. 174, as laying down that the
Śrāddha during the ‘dark fortnight’ should be preformed on the Moonless
Day;—on p. 35, II, as precluding the offering of Homa-libations in the
ordinary fire;—and again on II, p. 136, to the same effect.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p. 615), which remarks that it
appears as if it were forbidding the performance of Śrāddha by a man
‘with the Fire’ on any but the Moonless Day; and proceeds to note that
some people have taken this to mean that if a Śrāddha happens to fall on
any other day, the man ‘with the Fire’ should do the ‘*saṅkalpa*’ on
that day, but postpone the actual performance till the Moonless Day;—but
trustworthy people have held that what is meant is that for the man
‘with the Fire,’ even if there should arise the necessity of performing
a Śrāddha on another day, he should always wait till the Moonless Day.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 111) which remarks that the
first half assigns the reason for what is asserted in the second half.
It quotes three opinions—(1) Some people accept this verse in its
literal sense; (2) ‘our teachers’ hold that it is meant to forbid for
the man ‘with the fire’ the performance of that Śrāddha only which is
done in the form of the ‘*Piṇḍapitṛyajña*’;—(3) ‘our own opinion’ is
that it serves to lay down that if any Śrāddha happens to fall on other
days, the Man ‘with the fire’ should do it on the Moonless Day’;—in
*Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 369), which reproduces the note from
*Hemādri*;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1679) which explains the meaning
as—‘The Agnihotri should not perform any Śrāddha in which the
ritualistic details of the *Darśa-Śrāddha* are not adopted’; that is, he
should perform the Śrāddha only in the manner of the *Darśa-Śrāddha*; it
does *not* mean that ‘he should not perform any Śrāddha except the
Darśa’;—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 7), which rejects the view set
forth by *Hemādri*, attributing it to Halāyudha.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Caturvargacintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p. 2330).—‘One who has
taken to the fire shall make the offerings into the Dakṣiṇāgni; one who
is without the fire shall do it either in the Upasada fire, or, in the
absence of fire, into the hands of a Brāhmaṇa, or in water.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Having kindled either the Dakṣināgni, for purposes
of Homa, or having kindled the ordinary fire simply for the purpose of
having a fire, he shall offer the oblations for the accomplishment of
the rite.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.97).—‘Every day the householder shall perform the
Smārta rites in the marriage-fire, or in the fire kindled at the time of
inheritance; and the Śrauta rites in the sacrificial fire.’

Do. (1(?).236).—‘When going to pour the oblation into the fire, he shall
take up the food overflowing with butter, and being permitted to go on
with the offering, shall pour the oblation into the fire, in the manner
of the Pitṛyajña.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

282	The burnt-oblation, offered at a sacrifice to the manes, must not be made in a common fire; a Brahmana who keeps a sacred fire (shall) not (perform) a funeral sacrifice except on the new-moon day.
</details>
