+++
title = "01 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
6.1 Anasritah, without depending on;-on what;-on that which is
karma-phalam, the result of action- i.e. without craving for the result
of action-. He who craves for the results of actions becomes dependent
on the results of actions. But this person is the opposite of such a
one. Hence (it is said), 'wihtout depending on the result of action.
Having become so, yah he who; karoti, performs accomplishes; (karma, an
action;) which is his karyam, duty, the nityakarmas such as Agnihotra
etc. which are opposed to the kamya-karmas-. Whoever is a man of action
of this kind is distinguished from the other men of action. In order to
express this idea the Lord says, sah, he ; is a sannyasi, monk, and a
yogi. Sanyyasa, means renunciation. he who is possessed of this is a
sannyasi, a monk. And he is also a yogi. Yoga means concentration of
mind. He who has that is a yogi. It is to be understood that this man is
possessed of these alities. It is not to be understood that, only that
person who does not keep a fire (niragnih) and who is actionless
(akriyah) is a monk and a yogi. Niragnih is one from whom the fires
\[viz Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, Anvaharya-pacana, etc.\], which are the
accessories of rites, have bocome dissociated. By kriya are mean
austerity, charity, etc. which are performed wityout fire. Akriyah,
actionless, is he who does not have even such kriyas. Objection: Is it
not only with regard to one who does not keep a fire and is acitonless
that monasticsm and meditativeness are well known in the Vedas, Smrtis
and scriptures dealing with meditation; Why are monasticism and
meditativeness spoken of here with regard to one who keeps a fire and is
a man of action-which is not accepted as a fact; Reply: This defect does
not arise, because both are sought to be asserted in some secondary
sense. Objection: How is that; Reply: His being monk is by virtue of his
having given up hankering for the results of actions; and his being a
man of meditation is from the fact of his doing actions as accesories to
meditation or from his rejection of thoughts for the results of actions
which cause disturbances in the mind. Thus both are used in a figurative
sense. On the contrary, it is not that monasticism and meditativeness
are meant in the primary sense. With a veiw to pointing out this idea,
the Lord says:
