+++
title = "02 यं सन्न्यासमिति"

+++
6.2 Yam, that which is characterized by the giving up of all actions and
their results; which prahuh, they, the knowers of the Vedas and the
Smrtis, call; sannyasam iti, monasticism, in the real sense; viddhi,
known; tam, that monasticism in the real sense; to be yogam, Yoga,
consisting in the performance of actions, O Pandava. Accepting what kind
of similarity between Karma-yoga, which is characterized by engagement
(in actions), and its opposite, renunciation in the real sense, which is
characterized by cessation from work, has their eation been stated; When
such an apprehension arises, the answer is this; From the point of view
of the agent, there does exist a simialrity of Karma-yoga with real
renunciation. For he who is a monk in the real sense, from the very fact
of his having given up all the means needed for accomplishing actions,
gives up the thought of all actions and their results-the source of
desire that leads to engagement in work. \[Thoughts about an object lead
to the desire for it, which in turn leads to actions for getting it.
(Also see note under 4.19)\] also, even while performing actions, gives
up the thought for results. Pointing out this idea, the Lord says: Hi,
for; kascit, nobody, no man of action whosoever; asannyasta-sankalpah,
who has not given up expactaions-one by whom has not been renounced
expectation, anticipation, of results;bhavati, becomes, i.e. can become;
yogi, a yogi, a man of concentration, because thought of results is the
cause of the disturbance of mind. Therefore, any man of action who gives
up the thought of results would become a yogi, a man of concentration
with an unperturbed mind, because of his having given up thought of
results which is the cause of mental distractions. This is the purport.
Thus, because of the similarity of real monasticism with Karma-yoga from
the point of veiw of giving up by the agent, Karma-yoga is extolled as
monasticism in, 'That which they call monasticism, know that to be Yoga,
O Pandava.' Since Karma-yoga, which is independent of results, is the
remote help to Dhyana-yoga, therefore it has been praised as
monasticism. Thereafter, now the Lord shows how Karma-yoga is helpful to
Dhyana-yoga:
