+++
title = "04 यदा हि"

+++
6.4 Hi, verily; yada, when; a yogi who is concentrating his mind,
sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi, who has given up thought about everything-who
is apt to give up (sannyasa) all (sarva) thoughts (sankalpa) which are
the causes of desire, for things here and hereafter; na anusajjate, does
not become attached, i.e. does not hold the idea that they have to be
done by him; indriya-arthesu, with regard to sense-objects like sound
etc.; and karmasu, with regard to actions-nitya, naimittika, kamya and
nisiddha (prohibited) because of the absence of the idea of their
utility; tada, then, at that time; ucyate, he is said to be;
yoga-arudhah, established in Yoga, i.e. he is said to have attained to
Yoga. From the expression, 'one who has given up thought about
eveything', it follows that one has to renounce all desires and all
actions, for all desires have thoughts as their source. This accords
with such Smrti texts as: 'Verily, desire has thought as its source.
Sacrifices arise from thoughts' (Ma. Sm. 2.3); 'O Desire, I know your
source. You surely spring from thought. I shall not think of you. So you
will not arise in me' (Mbh. Sa. 177.25). And when one gives up all
desires, renunciation of all actions becomes accomplished. This agrees
with such Upanisadic texts as, '(This self is identified with desire
alone.) What it desires, it resolves; what it resolves, it works out'
(Br. 4.4.5); and also such Smrti texts as, 'Whatever actions a man does,
all that is the effect of desire itself' (Ma. Sm. 2.4). It accords with
reason also. For, when all thoughts are renounced, no one can even move
a little. So, by the expression, 'one who has given up thought about
everything', the Lord makes one renounced all desires and all actions.
When one is thus established in Yoga, then by that very fact one's self
becomes uplifted by oneself from the worldly state which is replete with
evils. Hence,
