+++
title = "14 प्रशान्तात्मा"

+++
6.14 Dharayan, holding; kaya-siro-girvam, the body (torso), head and
neck; samam, erect; and acalam, still-movement is possible for one (even
while) holding these erect; therefore it is specified, 'still'-;
sthirah, being steady, i.e. remaining steady; sampreksya, looking svam
nasikagram, at tip of his own nose -looking at it intently, as it were;
ca, and; anavalokayan, not looking; disah, around, i.e. not glancing now
and then in various directions-. The words 'as it were' are to be
understood because what is intended here is not an injunction for
looking at the tip of one's own nose! What then; It is the fixing the
gaze of the eyes by withdrawing it from external objects; and that is
enjoined with a veiw to concentrating the mind. \[What is sought to be
presented here as the primary objective is the concentration of mind. If
the gaze be directed outward, then it will result in interrupting that
concentration. Therefore the purpose is to first fix the gaze of the
eyes within.\] If the intention were merely the looking at the tip of
the nose, then the mind would remain fixed there itself, not on the
Self! In, 'Making the mind fixed in the Self' (25), the Lord will speak
of concentrating the mind verily on the Self. Therefore, owing to the
missing word iva (as it were), it is merely the withdrawl of the gaze
that is implied by sampreksya (looking). Further, prasantatma, with a
placid mind, with a mind completely at peace; vigata-bhih, free from
fear sthitah, firm; brahmacari-vrate, in the vow of a celibate, the vow
cosisting in serivce of the teacher, eating food got by beggin,
etc.-firm in that, i.e. he should follow these; besides, mat-cittah,
with the mind fixed on Me who am the supreme God; samyamya, by
controlling; manah, the mind, i.e. by stopping the modifications of the
mind; yuktah, through concentration, i.e. by becoming concentrated;
asita, he should remain seated; matparah, with Me as the supreme Goal.
Some passionate person may have his mind on a woman, but he does not
accept the woman as his supreme Goal. What then; He accepts the king or
Sive as his goal. But this one (the yogi) not only has his mind on Me
but has Me as his Goal. After that, now is being stated the result of
Yoga:
