+++
title = "06 तत्र सत्त्वम्"

+++
14.6 Tatra, among them, among sattva etc.;-the characteristics of sattva
itself is being stated first-sattva, nirmalatvat, being pure like a
crystal stone;is prakasakam, an illuminator; and anamayam, harmless.
Anagha, O sinless one; badhnati, it binds. How; Sukhasangena, through
attachment to happiness. Bringing about the association of happiness,
which is the object, with the Self, which is the subject, in the form of
the idea, 'I am happy', is certainly an unreal contact with happiness.
This as such is nescience, for the ality of an object cannot belong to a
subject. And it has been said by the Lord that all the alities, from
'desire' to 'fortitude' (see 13.6), are, indeed, of the field, which is
the object. Therefore, it is certainly through nescience, which is an
attribute \[In reality, though nescience has no connection with the
Self, yet, since there is none other with which it can become associated
and since it has no independence, therefore the Commentator imagines it
as an attribute of the Self.\] of the Self and has the characteristics
of non-discrimination between object and subject, that sattva apparently
brings about the association with happiness, which is not the Self. It
makes (the Self) attached, as it were; \[Here Ast. adds 'asangam saktam
iva, (makes) the Unattached attached, as it were'.-Tr.\] makes one not
possessed of happiness as though possessed of it! Similarly, it binds
also jnana-sangena, through attachment to knowledge. \[Jnana, derived in
the sense of 'that through which one knows,' means an instrument of
knowledge, and not Consciousness. (S.: Knowledge arising from the study
of the import of various scriptures; or, jnanam, means the scriptures,
through which the supreme God is known and which leads to devotional
practices, but not to steadfastness in (the absolute) Brahman.\] Because
of its concomitance with happiness, knowledge here is an attribute of
the internal organ, the field, but not of the Self. Were it an attribute
\[If knowledge were a natural attribute of the Self, then there can be
no estion of the latter again becoming bound through association with
the former.\] of the Self, there could be no contact (between it and the
Self), and 'bondage' would become illogical. Association with knowledge
etc. should be understood in the same sense as with happiness.
