+++
title = "22 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
14.22 Na dvesti, he neither dislikes these; prakasam, illumination
(knowledge), an effect of sattva; pravrttim, activity, an effect of
rajas; and moham, delusion, an effect of tamas; sampravrttani, when they
appear, when they fully emerge in the form of objects (of experience)-.
'In me has arisen a perception which is a result of tamas; thery I have
become deluded'; so also, 'In me has risen (the inclination to) action
which is painful and is born of rajas. By that rajas I have been
actuated, carried away from my own nature. This is a matter of sorrow to
me that there has been a deviation from my own nature'; similarly, 'The
ality of sattva, in the form of illumination that is knowledge, binds me
by attributing discrimination to me and making me attached to
happiness'-(by thinking) in these ways one dislikes them because of his
being not fully enlightened. The person who has transcended the alities
does not dislike them in this manner. Unlike a person having sattva
etc., who longs for the effects of sattva etc. which withdraw themselves
after becoming manifest to him, the person who has gone beyond the
alities na kanksati, does not long for them in that way; nivrttani, when
they disappear. This is the idea. This is not an indication that can be
perceived by others. What then; Since this characteristic is perceivable
to oneself, it is merely subjective. For dislike or longing, which is a
subjective experience of a person, is not seen by another. Now, then,
the Lord gives the reply to the estion, 'What is the behaviour of one
who has gone beyond the alities;':
