+++
title = "27 ब्रह्मणो हि"

+++
14.27 Hi, for; aham, I, the inmost Self; am the pratistha brahmanah,
Abode-that in which something abides is pratistha-of Brahman which is
the supreme Self. Of Brahman of what kind; Amrtasya, of that which is
indestructible; avyayasya, of that which is immutable; and sasvatasya,
of that which is eternal; dharmasya, of that which is the Dharma,
realizable through the Yoga of Jnana which is called dharma (virtue);
and aikantikasya sukhasya, of that which is the absolute, unfailing
Bliss by nature. Since the inmost Self is the abode of the supreme
Self-which by nature is immortal etc.-, therefore, through perfect
Knowledge it (the former) is realized with certainty to be the supreme
Self. This has been stated in, 'he alifies for becoming Brahman'. The
purport is this: Indeed, that power of God through which Brahman sets
out, comes forth, for the purpose of favouring the devotees, etc., that
power which is Brahman Itself, am I. For, a power and the possesser of
that power are non-different. Or, brahman means the conditioned Brahman,
since It (too,) is referred to by that word. 'Of that Brahman, I Myself,
the unconditioned Brahman-and none else-am the Abode.' (The abode of
Brahman) of what alities; Of that which is immortal; of that which has
the ality of deathlessness; of that which is immutable; so also, of that
which is the eternal; which is the dharma having the characteristics of
steadfastness in Knowledge; of that which is the absolute, unestionably
certain Bliss born of that (steadfastness);-'I am the Abode' is
understood.
