+++
title = "14 न कर्तृत्वम्"

+++
5.14 Na kartrtvam etc. This Soul does not do anything for anything. But,
Its exertion is only Its inherent nature and it is not due to any desire
for results. For, the Bhagavat, the Conscious Energy Itself Whose
ultimately true inherent nature is the
Illumination-Bliss-Freedom-of-Will, and Which brings out, merely by Its
own nature, the continuous series of creation, manitenance and withdrawl
of all (the Universe); hence in It, there is never a departure, even to
a little extent, from Its own inherent nature. Hence there is no such
thing as a particular stage of being a creator i.e., a creatorhood
separate \[from Itself\]. Because that does not exist, what actions can
be there ; If actions are not there, the fruit is to be of what or for
whom ; Then what connection could be three with the fruit of action ;
\[Further\], 'action' in this context is \[only\] the kriya-\[sakti\] or
creative energy \[which is nothing but His will\], and 'result of
action' too in only the fruit of this kriya. For example, the activity
like rotating the \[potter's\] wheel by the stick is not \[actually\]
different \[from what is to be created i.e., the pot\]. Nor the creator
of the pot is different from it. For, all exist within the Conscious
Energy. Therefore, it is only the Animate Sovereign Supreme Lord that
manifests in this and that form. Therefore there exist no activity and
its result etc., apart from That. This is demonstrated conclusion \[of
the scriptures\]. So, if there is no activity or its result \[as stated
above\], then even the result, ordained in \[the scriptural\]
injunctions cannot have a status of being produced by the unseen
\[cause\]. After saying this in the other first hemistich \[of the
following verse\], the Lord justifies in the other hemistich the same
statement with reference to the men of mundane life :-
