+++
title = "13 तत्रैकस्थञ्"

+++
11.13 'There', in that unie and divine body of the God of gods -
infinite in length and breadth, with innumerable hands, stomachs, faces
and eyes, of immeasurable splendour, eipped with innumerable divine
weapons, adorned with innumerable divine ornaments appropriate to itself
and with divine garlands and raiments, fragrant with celestial perfumes
and full of wonders , there Arjuna beheld with the appropriate divine
eyes granted by the grace of the Lord, the 'entire universe' consisting
of Prakrti (material Nature) and the selves, all remaining in 'one
single spot,' namely, at one single point. He beheld 'the whole
universe' with all its sub-divisions, differentiated into varied and
wonderful classes of experiencing beings like Brahma, gods, animals,
men, immovables etc., and the places, objects and means of experiences
such as earth, ether, Rasatala, Atala, Vitala, Sutala etc. He beheld
thus the entire universe as depicted in such texts as those starting
with 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8),
'Indeed I shall tell you, O Arjuna, My glorious self-manifestations'
(10.9), 'I am the Self, O Arjuna, dwelling in the hearts of all beings'
(10.20), and 'Of Adityas, I am Visnu' (10.21), and ending with 'Nothing
that moves or does not move exists without Me' (10.39), and 'I remain,
with a single fraction of Myself sustaining this whole universe'
(10.42).
