+++
title = "19 अनादिमध्यान्तमनन्तवीर्य"

+++
11.19 I behold You as without beginning, middle and end. Your might is
infinite, of unsurpassed excellence. Here the term 'might' is used for
illustration. The meaning is that You are the sole repository of
knowledge, strength, sovereignty, valour, power and glory, one whose
excellence cannot be surpassed. Your arms are infinite, i.e., they are
countless. This is also for illustration, implying that You have an
infinite number of arms, stomachs, feet, mouths etc. The sun and moon
are Your eyes; all Your eyes are like the moon and the sun, beaming with
grace and power. The grace is directed towards the devotees like the
gods who offer salutations etc., and power is directed against Asuras,
Raksasas etc., who are opposed to these. For it will be said later on:
'The Raksasas flee on all sides in fear, and all the hosts of Siddhas
bow down to You' (11.36). Your mouth is emitting fire, namely, the fire
appropriate for destroying all things, as the Fire of Time consumes the
world at the time of dissolution. With Your own radiance You are warming
the universe. By radiance (Tejas) is meant the poweer to vanish others.
I behold You warming (or governing) the universe with Your own radiance.
The meaning is this: 'I directly realise You' as taught before as the
Creator of all, as the supporter of everything, as the sovereign over
everything, as the destroyer of everything, as the ocean of knowledge
and other infinite attributes, as without beginning, middle and end, and
as possessing a divine body of this nature. How, in one divine body, can
there be many stomachs etc.; This is possible in the following way: From
a hip of infinite extent, stomachs etc., as described, branc off
upwards. The divine feet etc., branch off downwards. So there is no
contradiction in attributing a pair of eyes for each face. 'On
perceiving You to be thus, the gods etc., and myself, have become
frightened - says Arjuna in the following words:
