+++
title = "01 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
16.1 Abhayam, fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih, purtiy of the mind
(sattva), mentally avoiding fraud, trickery, falsehood, etc. in
dealings, i.e., honest behaviour; jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih, persistence
in knowledge and yoga-jnana means knowledge of such subjects as the
Self, learnt from scriptures and teachers; yoga means making those
things that have been learnt matters of one's own personal experience
through concentration by means of withdrawl of the organs etc.;
persistence, steadfastness, in those two, knowledge and yoga;-this
\[This-refers to all the three from 'fearlessness' to 'persistence in
knowledge and yoga'.\] is the principal divine characteristic which is
sattvika (born of the sattva ality). That nature which may occur in
persons competent in their respective spheres, \[Persons treading the
path of Jnana-yoga or Karma-yoga have sattvika alities. Some of the
alities mentioned in the first three verses occur only in the former,
whereas the others are found in both or only in the latter.-Tr.\]-that
is said to be their sattvika attribute. Danam, charity, distribution of
food etc. according to one's ability; and damah, control of the external
organs-the control of the internal organ, santih, will be referred to
later; yajnah, sacrifices-Agnihotra etc. sanctioned by the Vedas, and
sacrifices in honour of gods and others \[Others: Those in honour of the
manes, humans and other beings. Brahma-yajna, the fifth sacrifice, is
referred to separately by svadhyaya.\] sanctioned by the Smrtis:
svadhyayah, study of the Rg-veda etc. for unseen results; tapah,
austerity, those concerning the body, etc., which will be stated
(17.14-16); arjavam, rectitude, straigthforwardness at all times-.
Further,
