+++
title = "03 तेजः क्षमा"

+++
16.3 Tajah, vigour, not the brightness of the skin; ksama, forgiveness,
absence of internal perturbation when offened or assulated-absence of
anger has been explained by us as the calming down of a perturbed mind;
thus, forgiveness and absence of anger are distinguished; dhrtih,
fortitude, a particular function of the mind which removes the tedium of
the body and organs when they become exhausted, and being rejuvenated by
which the body and organs do not feel any fatigue; saucam, purity-is of
two kinds: external, with the help of earth and water; and internal, the
cleanliness of mind and intellect, the absence of such impurities as
trickery, attachment, etc.; purity of these two kinds; adrohah, freedom
from malice, absence of the desire to injure others, absence of hatred;
na-atimanita, absence of haughtiness-too much self-esteem (mana) is
atimanah; one having that is atimani; its abstract form is atimanita;
absence of that, na-atimanita, i.e., absence of the feeling of one's
being too honourable. These (alities) beginning with fearlessness and
ending with this, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, bhavanti, are; (the
alities) abhijatasya, of one destined to have;-what kind of nature;-the
daivim, divine; sampadam, nature-of one destined to have divine
attributes, of one who is worthy of the excellence of the gods, i.e., of
one who would be illustrations in future. Thereafter, the demoniacal
nature is now being stated:
