+++
title = "02 राजविद्या राजगुह्यम्"

+++
9.2 And that is raja-vidya, the Sovereign Knowledge, the kind among
sciences because of the abundance of its radiance. Indeed, this
knowledge of Brahman shines most brilliantly among all kiinds of
learning \[The word raja means a king, or figuratively, the greatest;
or, derived from the root raj, to shine, it may mean shining.-Tr.\] So
also, idam, this; is raja-guhyam, the Sovereign Profundity, the kind
among profundities; uttamam, the best; pavitram, sanctifier. This
knowledge of Brahman, which sanctifies all things that purify, is the
greatest. Shine it reduces to ashes in a moment (the results of) all
actions-righteous, unrighteous and others-together with their roots,
accumulated over many thousands of births, therefore, what to speak of
its sanctifying power! Besides, it is pratyaksavagamam, directly
realizable, directly perceivable like happiness etc. Even though
possessed of many alities, a thing may be noticed to be contrary to
righteousness. The knowledge of the Self is not opposed to
righteousness, in that way, but it is dharmyam, righteous, not divorced
from righteousness. Eeve so, it may be difficult to practice. Hence the
Lord says it is susukham, very easy; kartum to practise, like the
knowledge of the distinction among jewels. It is seen (in the world)
that, actions which reire little effort and are accomplished easily
yield meagre results, whereas those that are difficult to accomplish
yield great results. Thus the contingency arises that this (knowledge of
Brahman), however. which is easily attained, perishes when its result
gets exhausted. Therefore the Lord says it is avyayam, imperishable.
From the point of view of its result, it is not perishable like (the
results of) actions. Hence the knowledge of the Self should be highly
regarded.
