+++
title = "10 मयाऽध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः"

+++
9.10 Maya, under Me; adhyaksena, as the supervisor, remaining changeless
as a mere witness under all circumstances; prakrtih, the Prakrti, My
maya consisting of the three gunas and characterized as ignorance;
suyate, produces; the world sa-cara-acaram. of the moving and the
none-moving things. Thus there is the Vedic text, 'The one divine Being
is hidden in all beings; He is amnipresent, the indwelling Self of all
bengs, the Supervisor of actions, the refuge of all beings, the witness,
the one who imparts consceiousness, unconditioned \[This is according to
Sankaracarya's commentary on this verse. A.G. interprets kevala as
non-dual.-Tr.\] and without alities' (Sv. 6.11). Anena hetuna, owing to
this reason-because of this presiding over; O son of Kunti, the jagat,
world, with the moving and the non-moving things, consisting of the
manifest and the unmanifest; viparivartate, revolves, under all
conditions \[During creation, continuance and dissolution.\] All the
activities of the world in the form, 'I eat this; I see; I hear this; I
experience this happiness, suffer this sorrow; I shall do this for that
purpose, \[Ast. omits this portion.-Tr\] I shall do this for this
purpose; I shall know this,' etc. indeed arise owing to their being the
objects of the conscious witness. They verily exist in consciousness,
and end in consciousness. And such mantras as, 'He who is the witness of
this is in the supreme heaven' \[Supreme heaven, the heart; i.e. He is
inscrutable.\] (Rg., Na. Su. 10.129.7; Tai. Br.2.8.9), reveal this fact.
Since it follows from this that there is no other conscious being part
from the one Deity-who is the witness of all as the absolute
Consciousness, and who in reality has no contact with any kind of
enjoyment-, therefore there is no other enjoyer. Hence, in this context,
the estion, 'For what purpose is this creation;', and its answer are
baseless-in accordance with the Vedic text, 'Who know (It) truly, who
can fully speak about this here; From where has this come; From where is
this variegated creation;' (Rg. 3.54.5; 10.129.6). And it has been
pointed out by the Lord also: 'Knowledge remains covered by ignorance.
Thery the creatures become deluded' (5.15).
