+++
title = "22 अनन्याश्चिन्तयन्तो माम्"

+++
9.22 On the other hand, ye janah, those persons, the monks, who are
desireless and fully illumined; who ananyah, becoming non-different
(from Me), having realized the supreme Deity, Narayana, as their own
Self; and cintayantah, becoming meditative; \['Having known that I,
Vasudeva, am the Self of all, and there is nothing else besides Me'.\]
paryu-pasate mam, worship Me everywhere; \['They see Me the one,
all-pervading, infinite Reality.'\] tesam, for them; who have realized
the supreme Truth, nitya-abhiyuktanam, who are ever attached (to Me);
aham, I; vahami, arrange for; both yoga-kesamam, securing what they lack
and preserving what they have. Yoga means making available what one does
not have, and ksema means the protection of what one has got. Since 'but
the man of Knowledge is the very Self. (This is) My opinion' and 'he too
is dear to Me' (7.17,18), therefore they have become My own Self as also
dear. Does not the Lord surely arrange for securing what they lack and
protecting what they have even in the case of other devotees; This is
true. He does arrange for it. But the difference lies in this: Others
who are devotees make their own efforts as well for their own sake, to
arrange for securing what they lack and protecting what they have. On
the contrary, those who have realized non-duality do not make any effrot
to arrange for themselves the acisition of what they do not have and the
preservation of what they have. Indeed, they desire nothing for
themselves, in life or in death. They have taken refuge only in the
Lord. Therefore the Lord Himself arranges to procure what they do not
have and protect what they have got. 'If you Yourself are the other gods
even, then do not their devotees too worship You alone;' 'Quite so!'
