+++
title = "+082"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ चक्षुषः' इति सप्तर्चं चतुर्दशं सूक्तम् । ऋष्याद्याः पूर्ववत् । ‘चक्षुषः' इत्यनुक्रान्तम् । गतः सूक्तविनियोगः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

82 (908)  
Visvakarman ́  
Viśvakarman Bhauvana  
7 verses: triṣṭubh  
This hymn complements the preceding one and may be the more interesting of  the two since it offers various hints about the various roles that Viśvakarman  plays. The first words of the hymn, which call Viśvakarman the “father of the  eye” (cákṣuṣaḥ pitā́), create the possibility of double reference. On the one hand,  as Geldner and Renou (EVP XV: 170) rightly see and the subordinate clause “for  he is insightful in mind” supports, the eye is the inspired vision of seers. On the  other hand, the “eye” can be the eye of the sun, as frequently in the R̥gveda (e.g.,  I.164.14, V.40.8, 59.5, X.10.9). This double possibility is realized in the remainder  of the verse, which describes both the sacrifice and the cosmos. In pāda b, the  primary reference is to the sacrifice, evident in the ghee that the father produced.  Because they are set in a sacrificial context, “the two that bob up and down” refer  initially to the sacrificial ladles (juhū́), bending to the fire. But the two can also  be heaven and earth, which rise and fall, a subsequent reading triggered by pāda  d. In 1cd there is a shift to a cosmic context, which then becomes primary, and  the sacrificial context is secondary. In 1c the phrase ántāḥ . . .pū́rve “ancient lim its”—the beginnings of the world—can also mean the “eastern limits,” the limits  from which the sacrificial area is measured. The reference to “heaven and earth”  in pāda d confirms the cosmic context of this hemistich but without excluding  sacrificial reference, for on the sacrificial ground heaven is represented by the  Āhavanīya or “offering fire” in the east and earth by the Gārhapatya or “domestic  fire” in the west. (Though those terms, ubiquitous in middle Vedic śrauta litera ture, are not used in the R̥gveda of those two fires, the polarity of the two fires is  clearly reflected in the R̥gveda.)  
In verse 2a there is again an ambiguity: iṣṭá may mean what is offered in sacrifice  or what is wished for, and here both meanings are possible. But whose are these  “offerings” or “wishes”? The seers represented in the constellation of the Seven  Seers (vs. 2b) are the closest and best possibilities. The frame of reference would  then be the cosmos. Or those offering or wishing may be the “ancient seers,” who  

appear in verse 4. In that case the frame of reference is the sacrifice. That is to say,  the first verses describe both the creation of the sacrifice and the creation of the  world and thereby link the creation of the sacrifice to the creation of the world.  
Whatever it is that Viśvakarman represents is central to these creations. He  is initially set beyond both the sacrifice and the cosmos as the “father” of poetic  vision and of the sun. But then in verse 2 he spreads throughout the sacrifice and  the world. Verse 2ab puns on his name Viśvakarman, repeating its first syllable by  the prefix vi- in vímanā “vast in mind,” víhāyā “vast in power,” and vidhātā́ “vast  distributor”—the last, the one who distributes widely. The opposite of vi-, literally  “apart,” is sam- “together, completely,” and the latter replaces vi- in 2bc in saṃdŕ̥ś “full manifestation,” a cosmic term, and sám √mad “fully invigorate,” a sacrificial  term. The lexical shifts create the sense that Viśvakarman first extends throughout  the sacrifice and the cosmos and then condenses in a perceptible form.  
In the latter part of the poem, in verses 5–7, the poet explores the manifest forms  that Viśvakarman has taken. The best clue to the forms of Viśvakarman is the ref erence repeated in verses 5 and 6 to “the first embryo” that the waters received and  in which all the gods were manifest and gathered. That first embryo can represent  any or all of three realities. First, on the cosmic plane, it can be the sun, which rises  out of the waters. Thus Viśvakarman would be initially the father of the sun and  then, in manifest form, the sun itself. Second, on the sacrificial plane, the embryo  can be fire, or more specificially the sacrificial fire, which is the “child of the waters”  (apā́ṃ nápāt) and the form in which the presence of the gods at the sacrifice is  manifested. And third, perhaps uniting cosmos and sacrifice, the embryo can be the  king, who is reborn as the sun or as a sun-like being by means of the unction waters  in the royal consecration rite. For a clearer reference to such imagery in the royal  consecration rite, see X.121.
</details>
