+++
title = "+034"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ऋभुर्विभ्वा' इत्येकादशर्चं द्वितीयं सूक्तं वामदेवस्यार्षं त्रैष्टुभमार्भवम् । “ ऋभुर्विभ्वा' इत्यनुक्रमणिका । व्यूढे दशरात्रे पञ्चमेऽहनि वैश्वदेवशस्त्रे आर्भवनिविद्धानीयमिदम् । 'ऋभुर्विभ्वा स्तुषे जनम् ' ( आश्व. श्रौ. ८. ८) इति सूत्रितत्वात् ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

34 (330)  
R̥bhus  
Vāmadeva Gautama  
11 verses: triṣṭubh  
This hymn is built upon an urgent appeal that the R̥bhus and Indra reward and  prosper the sacrificers. That desire is expressed especially in the repetitions of the  noun ratnadhéya “the conferring of treasure” and adjective ratnadhá/-dhā́ “con ferring treasure.” Ratnadhéya (1b, 4a, 11d) occurs in the first and last verses and  thereby frames the hymn; ratnadhá/-dhā́ (6d, 7d, 8d) is in the opening verses of the  second half of the hymn. This repetition is amplified by the closely related phrases  rayíṃ √dhā “confer riches” (10b) and rātíṃ √dhā “confer a gift” (10d), in the final  verse before the extra-hymnic concluding verse 11.  
Such word and sound repetition is a broader strategy of this poet. So pādas 5a,  5c, and 6a all begin with ā́ “here” and their following pādas open with an m-sound  and repeat nasals, while using relatively few stops: 5b mahó naro dráviṇaso gr̥ṇānā́ḥ,  5d imā́ ástaṃ navasvà iva gman, 6b imáṃ yajñáṃ námasā hūyámānāḥ. The result is  a humming sound reminiscent of stotra chants in the classical Vedic rite. Then 6c,  7a, 7b, 8a, 8b, 8c, and 8d begin with forms of sajóṣas “together” to emphasize the  collectivity of gods who receive the soma. And finally, in a mirroring of verses 5–6,  pādas 9a, 9c, and 10a begin with yé “who.”  
Implicit in the hymn is an insistence that the R̥bhus, even if they were once mor tals, are now gods, able to bestow gifts on the sacrificers. Verse 3 defines their dual  status as divine recipients of soma and as priests who offered soma. The sacrifice  belongs to them, for as priests “like Manu” they long ago offered the sacrifice, but  they also received it as gods. They are called sūrí “patrons” (6c), a term that can apply  to sacrificers or to gods who reward the priests of the sacrifice. In 11cd the R̥bhus are  invoked to receive the soma together with unnamed kings, who again could be divine  or human. But the poet places particular emphasis on their divinity. The linking of  the R̥bhus with Indra, especially at the beginning and end of the hymn (1a, 5a, 6c,  11c), more than just names the principal divine recipients at the Third Pressing; it also reaffirms the divinity of the R̥bhus through their close relationship to Indra. In verses  7–8 the poet directly addresses Indra and invites him to drink the soma together with  many of the other deities who receive offerings at the soma pressings, and then adds  the R̥bhus (8b) to his address and to these divinities. The poet even creates an icon of  their achievement of divinity. The one time in this hymn that they are directly called  gods is the very last word of the last verse, which forms a climax to the hymn.  
One final note:  at the beginning of the hymn, the poet names the three  R̥bhus: R̥bhu, Vibhvan, and Vāja. Normally, the three together are called R̥bhus,  of course, but elsewhere and here they can also be invoked by elliptical plurals of  either of the other two names. In this hymn they are called Vājas in successive verses  (3d, 4c, and 5a), an address likely inspired by the epithet vā́jaratna “whose treasure  is victory’s prize” in verse 2. In 9d they are called Vibhūs, obviously patterning with  Vibhvan. In the first half of verse 9 the poet associates the name “R̥bhu” with the  gods’ typical deeds: they created a chariot for the Aśvins, rejuvenated their par ents, and fashioned a cow and two horses. As noted before, most of these deeds  refer to priestly action, since the chariot can be the sacrifice, the parents either the  Aśvins themselves or the sacrificer and his wife, the cow the soma stalks, and the  two horses the horses that bring Indra to the sacrificial area. In 9cd the poet uses the  name “Vibhū” (or the form may be “Vibhu”) and the deeds he describes are more  unusual. The R̥bhus do not elsewhere make armor, so the significance of this story  is obscure. The other two deeds echo the plea for prosperity. As Geldner has noted,  Yāska understands ŕ̥dhak both in the sense of “separate” (pr̥thak) and “prospering”  (r̥dhnuvan). The first is the proper meaning of ŕ̥dhak, but if the second is suggested  by the word’s similarity to √r̥dh “prosper,” then the verse implies that the Vibhūs  both create and prosper the sacrificer’s world.
</details>
