+++
title = "04 सन्नियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं"

+++
12.3 - 12.5 The individual self meditated upon by those who follow the
path of the 'Aksara' (the Imperishable) is thus described: It cannot be
'defined' in terms indicated by expressions like gods and men etc., for
It is different from the body; It is 'imperceptible' through the senses
such as eyes; It is 'omnipresent and unthinkable,' for though It exists
everywhere in bodies such as those of gods and others, It cannot be
conceived in terms of those bodies, as It is an entity of an altogether
different kind; It is 'common to all beings' i.e., alike in all beings
but different from the bodily forms distinguishing them; It is
'immovable' as It does not move out of Its unie nature, being
unmodifiable, and therefore eternal. Such aspirants are further
described as those who, 'subduing their senses' like the eye from their
natural operations, look upon all beings of different forms as 'eal' by
virtue of their knowledge of the sameness of the nature of the selves as
knowers in all. Therefore they are not given 'to take pleasure in the
misfortune of others,' as such feelings proceed from one's
identification with one's own special bodily form. Those who meditate on
the Imperishable Principle (individual self) in this way, even they come
to Me. It means that they also realise their essential self, which, in
respect of freedom from Samsara, is like My own Self. So Sri Krsna will
declare later on: 'Partaking of My nature' (14.2). Also the Sruti says:
'Untainted, he attains supreme eality' (Mun. U., 3.1.3). Likewise He
will declare the Supreme Brahman as being distinct from the freed self
which is without modification and is denoted by the term 'Imperishable'
(Aksara), and is described as unchanging (Kutastha). 'The Highest Person
is other than this Imperishable' (15.16 - 17). But in the teaching in
Aksara-vidya 'Now that higher science by which that Aksara is known'
(Mun. U., 1.5) the entity that is designated by the term Aksara is
Supreme Brahman Himself; for He is the source of all beings, etc.
Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the
unmanifest. The path of the unmanifest is a psychosis of the mind with
the unmanifest as its object. It is accomplished with difficulty by
embodied beings, who have misconceived the body as the self. For,
embodied beings mistake the body for the self. The superiority of those
who adore the Supreme Being is now stated clearly:
