+++
title = "12 श्रेयो हि"

+++
12.12 More than the practice of remembrance (of the Lord), which is
difficult in the absence of love for the Lord, the direct knowledge of
the self, arising from the contemplation of the imperishable self
(Aksara), is conducive to the well-being of the self. Better than the
imperfect knowledge of the self, is perfect meditation on the self, as
it is more conducive to the well-being of the self. More conducive than
imperfect meditation (i.e., meditation unaccompanied with renunciation),
is the activity performed with renunciation of the fruits. It is only
after the annihilation of sins, through the performance of works
accompanied by renounciation of fruits, that peace of mind is attained.
When the mind is at peace, perfect meditation on the self is possible.
From meditation results the direct realisation of the self. From the
direct realisation of the self results supreme devotion. It is in this
way that Atmanistha or devotion to the individual self becomes useful
for a person who is incapable of practising loving devotion to the
Supreme Being. And for one practising the discipline for attaining the
self (Jnana Yoga) without acisition of perfect tranillity of mind,
disinterested activity (Karma Yoga), including in it meditation on the
self, is the better path for the knowledge of the self. \[Thus the steps
are performance of works without desire for fruits, eanimity of mind,
meditation on the self, self-realisation, and devotion to the Lord.\]
Now Sri Krsna enumerates the attributes reired of one intent on
performance of disinterested activity:
