+++
title = "13 अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानाम्"

+++
12.13 - 12.14 In these and succeeding verses the Lord mentions the
nature of the Karma Yogi who adores Him through his works. In other
words the Bhakti element in Karma Yoga is emphasised. He never hates any
being even though they hate him and do him wrong. For he thinks that the
Lord impels these beings to hate him and do him wrong for atoning for
his transgressions. He is 'friendly', evincing a friendly disposition
towards all beings whether they hate him or do him wrong. He is
'compassionate', evincing compassion towards their sufferings. He is
free from the 'feeling of mine,' i.e., he is not possessive with regard
to his body, senses and all things associated with them. He is free from
the feeling of 'I', i.e., is free from the delusion that his body is the
self. Therefore, 'pain and pleasure are the same to him,' i.e., he is
free from distress and delight resulting from pain and pleasure arising
from his deeds. He is 'enduring', unaffected even by those two (i.e.,
pleasure and pain) due to the inevitable contact of sense-objects. He is
'content', namely, satisfied with whatever chance may bring him for the
sustenance of his body. He 'ever meditates,' i.e., is constantly intent
on contemplating on the self as separate from the body. He is
'self-restrained', namely, he controls the activities of his mind. He is
of 'firm conviction' regarding the meanings taught in the science of the
self. His 'mind and reason are dedicated to Me' i.e., his mind and
reason are dedicated to Me in the form 'Bhagavan Vasudeva alone is
propitiated by disinterested activities, and when duly propitiated, He
wil bring about for me the direct vision of the self.' Such a devotee of
mine, i.e., who works in this manner as a Karma Yogin, is dear to Me.
