+++
title = "03 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
8.3 Aksaram means that which does not perish (na ksarati), the supreme
Self. This agrees with the Upanisadic text, 'Under the mighty rule of
this Immutable, O Gargi৷৷.' (Br. 3.8.9). And (the letter) Om is not
accept here \[as the meaning of aksara (lit. letter)\], because of its
being mentioned (as a letter) later on in, 'The single letter Om, which
is Brahman' (13). Besides, the adjective 'supreme' is more apporpriate
with regard to the absolute, immutable Brahman. By svabhava, self-hood,
is meant the eixtence of that very supreme Brahman in every body as the
indwelling Self. Svabhavah ucyate, self-hood is said to be, is referred
to by the word; adhyatmam, the entity which, as the indwelling Self,
exists in the body (atma) by making it its habitat (adhikrtya), and
which in the ultimate analysis is the supreme Brahman. Visargah, the
offerings, the giving away to gods of things like porridge \[Caru: An
oblations of rice, barley and pulse boiled-together to be offered to
gods.\], cake, etc.; bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah, which bring about the
origin of the existence of things; is karma-sanjnitah, meant by action.
This sacrifice consisting in pouring of oblations is called action. The
existence (bhava) of (moving and nonmoving) things (bhuta) is
bhuta-bhava. The coming into being (udbhava) of that (existence) is
bhuta-bhava-udbhavah. That which causes (karoti) this is
bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah, i.e. the originator of existing things. It is
needed from this source that all bengs, moving and non-moving, originate
thorugh the successive processes of railfall etc. (see 3.14-15).
