+++
title = "11 यदक्षरं वेदविदो"

+++
8.11 Pravaksye, I shall speak; te, to you; samgrahena, briefly; tat, of
that; which is called the aksaram, immutable-that whch does not get
exhausted, which is indestructible; padam, Goal to be reached; yat,
which; veda-vidah, the knowers of the Vedas, the knowers of the purport
of the Vedas; vedanti, declare, speak of It as opposed to all
alifications-'It is neither gross nor minute' (Br. 3.8.8) etc.-, in
accordance with the Upanisadic text, 'O Gargi, the knowers of Brahman
say this Immutable (Brahman) is that' (ibid); and further, yat, into
which, after the attainment of complete realization; visanti, enter;
yatayah, the diligent ones, the monks; who have become vita-ragah, free
from attachment; and icchantah, aspiring to know (-to know being
supplied to complete the sense-); yat, which Immutable; people caranti,
practise; brahmacaryam, celibacy-at the teacher's house. Commencing
with, '"O venerable sir, which world does he really win thery who, among
men, intently meditates on Om in that wonerful way till death;" To him
he said, "O Satyakama, this very Brahman that is (known as) the inferior
and superior is but this Om"' (pr.5.1-2), it has been stated, 'Again,
anyone who meditates on the supreme Purusa with the help of this very
syllable Om, as possessed of three letters,৷৷.he is lifted up to the
world of Brahma (Hiranyagarbha) by the Sama-mantras,' (op.cit.5) etc.
Again, beginning with '(Tell me of that thing which you see as)
different from virtue, different from vice,' it has been stated, 'I tell
you briefly of that goal which all the Vedas with one voice propound,
which all the austerities speak of, and wishing for which people
practise Brahmacarya: it is this, viz Om' (Ka.1.2.14-15), etc. In the
above otations, Om which is going to be spoken of is presented as a name
of this supreme Brahman, and also as Its symbol like an image. This has
been done as a means to meditation on it (Om) for the attainment of the
supreme Brahman by poeple of low and mediocre intellect, in as much as
this leads to Liberation in course of time. Here also that very
meditation on Om in the manner stated above-which is the means of
attaining the supreme Brahman introduced in, '(He who meditates on) the
Omniscient, the Ancient,' and in, '(I shall speak to you birefly of that
immutable Goal) which the knowers of the Vedas declare,' and which
(meditation) leads to Liberation in due course \[Realization of Brahman
leads to immediate Liberation (sadyomukti, whereas meditation
(contemplation, upasana) leads to gradual Liberation
(krama-mukti).-Tr.\]-has to be spoken of along with 'adherence to yoga'
as also whatever is connected directly or indirectly with it. For this
purpose the following text is begun:
