+++
title = "18 अव्यक्ताद्व्यक्तयः"

+++
8.18 Ahar-agame, with the coming of day, at the time when Brahma wakes;
sarvah vyaktayah, all manifested things, all things that get manifested,
all creatures characterized as moving and non-moving; prabhavanti,
emerge, become manifested; avyaktat, from the Unmanifested-avyakta
(Unmanifested) is the state of sleep of Prajapati; from that avyakta.
Similarly, ratri-agame, when night comes, at the time when Brahma
sleeps; praliyante, they, all the manifested things, merge; tatra eva,
in that itself; avyakta-sanjnake, which is called the Unmanifested
referred to above. In order to obviate the defect of the emergence of
some unmerited result and the destruction of merited results; \[The
following verse says that the very same multitude of beings continues in
the different cycles of creation, and there-fore these two defects do
not arise.\] for pointing out the meaningfulness of the scriptures \[For
the earlier reason the scriptures do not lose their validity.\] dealing
with bondage and Liberation; and with a view to propounding detachment
from the world on the ground that the helpless multitude of beings
perishes after being born again and again under the influence of
accumulated results of actions that have for their origin such evils as
ignorance etc. \[The five evils are: ignorance, egoism, attachment,
aversion and clinging to life. (See P. Y. Su. 2.3)\], the Lord says
this:
