+++
title = "24 अग्निर्ज्योतिरहः शुक्लः"

+++
8.24 Agnih, fire-is a deity presiding over a period of time; similarly,
jyotih, light-also is a deity presiding over a period of time. Or fire
and light are the well-known Vedic deities. As the expression 'mango
grove' is used with regard to a place where mango trees are more
numerous, similarly, the expressions 'at which time' and 'that time' (in
the earlier verse) are used in view of the predominance (of the deities
presiding over time). \[If the first two (fire and light) are taken as
Vedic deities, then the remaining three are the only deities of time.
Still, the latter being numerically greater, all the five deities are
referred to as deities of time. The deities of both the Paths-of gods
and manes, or of the Northern and the Southern Paths as they are
called-who are gods of time, are referred to here as 'time' by such
words as day, fortnight, six months, etc.\] So also, ahah, daytime,
means the deity of daytime. Suklah, the bright fortnight, implies the
deity presiding over the bright fortnight. Sanmasah uttarayanam, the six
months of the Northern solstice-here, too, is understood the deity
presiding over the Path. This is the principle (of interpretation
followed elsewhere (in the Upanisads also). Tatra, following this Path;
janah, persons; who are brahma-vidah, knowers of Brahman, those engaged
in meditation on (the alified) Brahman; gacchanti, attain; brahma,
Brahman; prayatah, when they die. It is understood that they attain
Brahman through stages. Indeed, according to the Upanisadic text, 'His
vital forces do not depart' (Br. 4.4.46), there is neither going nor
coming back for those established in full realization, who are fit for
immediate Liberation. Having their organs merged in Brahman, they are
suffused with Brahman, they are verily identified with Brahman.
