+++
title = "001 विद्वद्भिः सेवितः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Learn that Dharma, which has been ever followed by, and sanctioned by the heart of, the learned and the good, who are free from love and hate.—(1)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रथमो ऽध्यायः शास्त्रप्रतिपाद्यार्थतत्त्वदर्शनार्थो ऽनुक्रान्तः । जगत्सृष्ट्यादिवर्णनं च तच्छेषम् एव व्याख्यातम् । इदानीं शास्त्रम् आरभते । तत्र प्रतिज्ञातो ऽर्थो जगत्सर्गादिवर्णनेन व्यवायाद् विस्मृत इत्य् अनुसंधानार्थं पुनः शिष्यान् प्रति बोधयति ।

- **यो धर्मो** भवतां शुश्रूषितस् **तम्** इदानीं मयोच्यमानं **निबोधत** अवहिता भूत्वा शृणुत । प्रथमे ऽध्याये पञ्चषाः श्लोकाः प्रयोजनादिप्रतिपादनार्थाः । परिशिष्टम् अर्थवादरूपम् । तच् चेन् नातिसम्यग् अवधारितं न धर्मपरिज्ञाने महती क्षतिः । इह तु साक्षाद् धर्म उपदिश्यते । ततो ऽवधानवद्भिर् अवधारणीयो ऽयम् अर्थ इति पुनर् उपन्यासफलम् । **धर्म**शब्द उक्तार्थो ऽष्टकाद्यनुष्ठानवचनः । बाह्यदर्शनिनस् तु भस्मकपालादिधारणम् अपि धर्मं मन्यन्ते । तन्निवृत्त्यर्थं **विद्वद्भिर्** इत्यादीनि विशेषणपदानि । **विद्वांसः** शास्त्रसंस्कृतमतयः प्रमाणप्रमेयस्वरूपविज्ञानकुशलाः । ते च वेदार्थविदो विद्वांसः, नान्ये । यतो वेदाद् अन्यत्र धर्मं प्रति ये गृहीतप्रामाण्यास् ते विपरीतप्रमाणप्रमेयग्रहणाद् अविद्वांस एव । एतच् च मीमांसातस् तत्त्वतो निश्चीयते ।

- **सन्तः** साधवः, प्रमाणपरिच्छिन्नार्थानुष्ठायिनो हिताहितप्राप्तिपरिहारार्थाय यत्नवन्तः । हिताहितं च दृष्टं प्रसिद्धम् । अदृष्टं च विधिप्रतिषेधलक्षणम् । तदनुष्ठानबाह्या असन्त उच्यन्ते । अत उभयम् अत्रोपात्तं ज्ञानम् अनुष्ठानं च । विद्यमानतावचनः सच्छब्दो न संभवति, आनर्थक्यात् । यद् धि येन सेव्यते तत् तेन विद्यमानेनैव ।

- **सेवा **अनुष्ठानशीलता । भूतप्रत्ययेनानादिकालप्रवृत्तताम् आह । नायम् अष्टकादिधर्मो ऽद्यत्वे केनचित् प्रवर्तित इतरधर्मवत् । एतद् एव **नित्य**शब्देन दर्शयति । यावत्संसारम् एष धर्मः । बाह्यधर्मास् तु सर्वे मूर्खदुःशीलपुरुषप्रवर्तिताः कियन्तं कालं लब्धावसरा अपि पुनर् अन्तर्धीयन्ते । न हि व्यामोहो युगसहस्रानुवर्ती भवति । सम्यग्ज्ञानम् अविद्यया संच्छन्नम् अपि तत्क्षये निर्मलताम् एवैति । न हि तस्य निर्मलतया छेदः संभवति[^१] ।


[^१]:
     M G J: saṃbhava iti (I follow DK 5: 604)

- **अद्वेषरागिभिः** । इदं बाह्यधर्मानुष्ठाने द्वितीयं कारणम् । व्यामोहः पूर्वम् उक्तः । अनेन लोभादय उच्यन्ते, रागद्वेषग्रहणस्य प्रदर्शनार्थत्वात् । लोभेन मन्त्रतन्त्रादिषु प्रवर्तयन्ति । अथ वा रागद्वेषयोर् लोभो ऽन्तर्भूतः । आत्मनि[^२] ये भोगोपायास् तेषु रक्ताः[^३] उपायान्तरेण[^४] जीवितुं असमर्था[^५] लिङ्गधारणादिना जीवन्ति । तद् उक्तम्- "भस्मकपालादिधारणम्, नग्नता, काषाये च वाससी बुद्धिपौरुषहीनानां जीविका" इति । **द्वेषो** विपरीतानुष्ठानकारणम् । द्वेषप्रधाना हि नातीव तत्त्वावधारणे समर्था भवन्ति, अतो ऽधर्मम् एव धर्मत्वेनाध्यवस्यन्तीति । अथ वोभाव् अपि **रागद्वेषौ** तत्त्वावधारणे प्रतिबन्धकौ । सत्याम् अपि कस्यांचिच् छास्त्रवेदनमात्रायां लब्धे ऽपि विद्वद्व्यपदेशे रागद्वेषवत्तया विपरीतानुष्ठानं संभवति । जानाना अपि यथावच् छास्त्रं कस्यचिद् द्वेष्यस्योपघाताय प्रियस्य चोपकराय कौटसाक्ष्याद्यधर्मं सेवन्ते[^६] । तेषां वेदमूलम् एवानुष्ठानम् इत्य् अशक्यनिश्चयम्, कारणान्तरस्य रागद्वेषलक्षणस्य संभवात् । अतस् तत्प्रतिषेधः ।


[^६]:
     G 1st ed.: sevanti


[^५]:
     G 1st ed.: samarthā


[^४]:
     M: ātmani ye bhogopayogāsareṇa


[^३]:
     G 1st ed.: ātmani yogopabhoge cāraktāḥ


[^२]:
     DK (5: 604): ātmano

- <u>अत्र चोद्यते</u>[^७] । **सद्भिर्** इति सच्छब्दः साधुतावचनो वर्णितः । कीदृशी च साधुता तस्य, यदि रागद्वेषाभ्याम् अधर्मे प्रवृत्तिः संभाव्यते । तस्माद् **अद्वेषरागिभिर्** इति न वक्तव्यम् ।


[^७]:
     M G: cocyate

- <u>एवं</u> तर्हि हेतुत्वेनोच्यते । यतो रागादिवर्जिता अतः सन्तो भवन्ति । रागद्वेषप्रधानत्वाभावश् चात्र प्रतिपाद्यते । न सर्वेण सर्वं तदभावयोग्यावस्थागतस्य हेतोर् निरन्वयम् उच्छिद्यते । तथा च श्रुतिः- "न ह वै सशरीरस्य सतः प्रियाप्रिययोर् अपहतिर् अस्ति" इति (छु ८.१२.१) । 

- **रागः** विषयोपभोगगृध्नुता । तत्प्रतिषेधव्यापारो द्वेषः[^८] । लोभो मात्सर्यम् असाधारण्येन स्पृहा, "परस्य चैतन् मा भूद् विभवख्यात्यादि" । चित्तधर्मा एते । अथ वा चेतनावस्तु स्त्रीसुतसुहृद्बान्धवादिषु स्नेहो रागः, लोभो ऽचेतनेष्व् अपि धनादिषु स्पृहा ।


[^८]:
     G: rāgadveṣaḥ

- **हृदयेन** । हृदयशब्देन चित्तम् आचष्टे । **अनुज्ञानं** च हृदयस्य प्रसादः । एषा हि स्थितिः । अन्तर्हृदयवर्तीनि बुद्ध्यादितत्त्वानि । यद्य् अपि बाह्यहिंसाभक्ष्यभक्षणादिषु मूढा धर्मबुद्ध्या प्रवर्तन्ते, तथापि हृदयाक्रोशनं तेषां भवति । वैदिके त्व् अनुष्ठाने परितुष्यति मनः ।

- तद् अस्य सर्वस्यायम् अर्थः । न मया तादृशो धर्म उच्यते यत्रैते दोषाः सन्ति । किं तु य एवंविधैर् महात्मभिर् अनुष्ठीयते स्वयं च यत्र चित्तं प्रवर्तयति वा । अत आदरातिशय उच्यमानेषु धर्मेषु युक्तः ।

- अथ वा **हृदयं** वेदः । स ह्य् अधीतो भावनारूपेण हृदयस्थितो हृदयम् । ततश् च त्रितयम् अत्रोपात्तम् । यदि तावद् अविचार्यैव स्वाग्रहात् काचित् प्रवृत्तिः कस्यचित् तथाप्य् अत्रैव युक्ता । एतत् **हृदयेनाभ्यनुज्ञात** इत्य् अनेनोच्यते । अथाप्य् अयं न्यायः "महाजनो येन गतः स पन्थाः" (म्भ् ३. अप्प्। ३२.६८) इति, तद् अप्य् अत्रैवास्ति । विद्वांसो ह्य् अत्र निष्कामाः प्रवृत्तपूर्वा अनिन्द्याश् च लोके । अथाप्रामाणिकी प्रवृत्तिः, सापि वेदप्रामाण्यात् सिद्धैवेति । सर्वप्रकारं प्रवृत्त्याभिमुख्यम् अनेन जन्यते । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् एतं श्लोकं सामान्येन धर्मलक्षणार्थं व्याचक्षते । एवंविधैर् यः सेव्यते स धर्मो ऽवगन्तव्यः । प्रत्यक्षवेदविहितस्य स्मार्तस्य वाचारतः प्राप्तस्य सर्वस्यैतल्लक्षणं विद्यते । अत्र तु य एतैः सेव्यते तं धर्मं निबोधतेति पाठो युक्तः ॥ २.१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The First Discourse was undertaken for the purpose of showing the real
character of the subject-matter dealt with by the Treatise; the
description of the creation of the World and such other subjects have
also been explained as supplementary to the said delineation of the
subject-matter of the Treatise. It is now that the Treatise actually
begins. As the promised subject of the Discourse, interrupted by the
description of world-creation and such other subjects, may have been
lost sight of,—the Teacher again addresses his pupils with a view to
recall the subject to their minds.

That ‘Dharma,’ which you desired to learn is now being expounded by
me,—please now ‘*learn*,’—*i.e*., be attentive and listen.

In Discourse I, five or six verses (85—91) were meant to point out the
purpose of the Treatise; the rest of it is mere ‘declamatory
description’ (*Arthavāda*). So that, if all that has not been carefully
learnt, there is not much harm; in the present Discourse however
‘Dharma’ itself is being directly expounded; hence this subject should
be carefully learnt. This is the meaning of the re-iteration (in this
verse, of *Dharma* being the subject-matter of the Treatise).

The term ‘*dharma*,’ as already explained, denotes *the performance of
the Aṣṭakā* and such other prescribed acts. External philosophers regard
as ‘*dharma*’ also such acts as the *wearing of ashes, the carrying of
begging-bowls*, and so forth;—and it is with a view to exclude these
from the category of ‘*Dharma*’ that the author adds the
qualifications—‘*followed by the learned*,’and so forth.

The ‘*learned*’ are those whose minds have been cultured by the study of
the sciences; those that are capable of discerning the real character of
the means of knowledge and the objects of knowledge. The ‘learned’
(meant here) are those who know the real meaning of the Veda, and not
others. In fact those persons that admit sources other than the Veda to
be the ‘means of knowledge’ in regard to *Dharma* are ‘unlearned,’
‘ignorant’; in as much as their notions of the means and objects of
knowledge are wrong. That this is so, we learn thoroughly from *Mīmāmsā*
(Sūtra, Adhyāya I).

The ‘*Good*,’—*i.e*., righteous men; those who translate into action
what is known from authoritative sources, and who always try to obtain
what is wholesome and avoid what is not wholesome;—what is ‘wholesome’
and ‘not wholesome’ among visible things is well known; among the
‘Unseen,’ that which forms the subject of ‘Injunction’ is ‘wholesome,’
while that which forms the subject of ‘prohibition’ is ‘not wholesome.’
Those who are outside the said pale of acting in accordance with the
said authoritative sources of knowledge are called ‘not good’
(unrighteous). It is for these reasons that both *knowledge* and
*acting* have been mentioned here (by means of the two epithets,
‘learned’ and ‘good’).

It is not possible for the term ‘*saṭ'* (in ‘*sadbhiḥ*’) to be taken in
the sense of *existing at the present time*; because in this sense the
epithet would be entirely superfluous: when a certain thing is
‘followed’ by one, it is only when this latter *exists* at the time \[so
that *existence* would be already implied by the other epithet.\]

By ‘*following*’ in the present context is meant capability of acting
(in conformity with). The Past-participial affix (in ‘*sevitaḥ*,’
‘followed’) indicates the fact of the *Dharma* having been in force from
times without beginning. As a matter of fact, such *Dharma* as consists
of the *Aṣṭakā* and other rites are not, like ordinary *Dharmas* or
Duties, set up by any person during the present time. This same fact is
also indicated by the term ‘ever.’ (The sense is that) this *Dharma* has
continued ever since the world-process has been going on. All other
extraneous *Dharmas*, being set up by ignorant and wicked persons,
though they may obtain currency for some time, drop out in course of
time; no mere delusion can continue for thousands of ages. True
knowledge on the other hand, even though it may for a time be shrouded
by ignorance, shines forth in all its brilliance, upon the destruction
of that ignorance. Being by its very nature, pure and brilliant, it can
never undergo entire destruction.

‘*Who are free from love and hate*’—What is referred to here is another
cause that leads men to take to heterodox *dharmas*. ‘Delusion’ having
been already described (as leading to the same end), the present phrase
serves to indicate greed and the rest; the direct mention of ‘love and
hate’ being meant to be only illustrative; *e.g*., it is by reason of
Greed that people have recourse to magical incantations and rites. Or
‘Greed’ may he regarded as included (not merely indicated) by ‘Love and
Hate.’ People who are too much addicted to what brings pleasure to
themselves, on finding themselves unable to carry on their living by
other means, are found to have recourse to such means of livelihood as
the assuming of hypocritical guises and so forth. This has been thus
described—‘The wearing of ashes and carrying of begging bowls, being
naked, wearing of discoloured clothes—these form the means of living for
people devoid of intelligence and energy.’

‘*Hate*,’—leads to the performance of acts contrary to those prescribed.
People filled with hate are not quite capable of comprehending the
truth; and hence they come to regard the wrong act (*adharma*) as the
right one (*dharma*).

Or, both ‘Love’ and ‘Hate’ may be regarded as obstacles to the
discernment of truth. As a matter of fact, even when some slight
knowledge of the scriptures has been acquired, and the man has acquired
the name of being ‘learned,’—there is every possibility of his acting
otherwise (than in strict accordance with the scriptures), if he happens
to be under the influence of love or hate. For instance, people, though
fully conversant with the scriptures, do commit such wrong acts as the
giving of false evidence, with a view either to do harm to some one whom
he hates, or to do good to some one whom he loves, and certainly one
cannot be sure that such acting of these people is based upon the Veda;
for the simple reason that there are present other forces (controlling
his action), in the shape of Love and Hate. It is for this reason that
these are prohibited.

The following objection is hero put forward:—“In the word ‘*sadbhiḥ*,’
the term ‘*saṭ*’ has been explained as denoting *righteousness*; but
what sort of *righteousness* could belong to the man for whom it is
considered possible to do wrong under the influence of Love and Hate?
Consequently, it is not necessary to add the epithet ‘free from love and
hate’ (this being already implied by the word ‘good’).”

\[Our answer to the above is as follows\]—As a matter of fact, the
epithet in question (‘*free from love and hate*’) is mentioned as the
reason or ground (of the aforementioned ‘goodness’ or ‘righteousness’);
the sense being that ‘it is because they are free from Love and Hate
that they are *good*.’

What is really meant is the absence of *undue predominance* of Love and
Hate (and not absolute *absence*); because no man, even though there be
forces at work tending to make him free from Love and Hate, can get rid
of these entirely, as declared by *Śruti* (Chāndogya Upaniṣad,
8-12-1)—‘So long as one has a body, there can be no cessation of the
agreeable and the disagreeable.’

‘*Love*’ here stands for hankering after the enjoyment of things; and
‘Hate’ is that which leads one to avoid or escape from a certain thing.
‘Greed’ is the jealous hankering after the sole possession of an object;
the feeling being in the form ‘may all this prosperity, fame and the
like not belong to any other person.’ All these are functions of the
Mind. Or, ‘Love’ may be taken as standing for the affection one feels
towards sentient beings, like one’s wife, son, relations and so forth;
and ‘greed’ for the longing that one has for riches and such insentient
things.

‘*By the heart*.’—‘Heart’ here stands for the Mind;—‘*sanction*’ is
satisfaction of mind. The real condition of things is this: *Buḍḍhi* and
other principles are located inside the Heart; and even though deluded
persons have recourse to such unrighteous acts as the killing of animals
apart from sacrifices, the eating of prohibited food and so
forth,—thinking them to be right ‘Dharma,’—yet they have compunctions in
their hearts; in the case of the performance of actions prescribed in
the Veda, on the other hand, the Mind feels satisfied.

The sense of all this is as follows:—‘The *Dharma* that I am going to
expound is not one beset with the said defects;—it is one that is
actually followed by high-souled persons and towards which the Mind
itself urges us. For these reasons it is only right that great regard
should be paid to the *Dharmas* that are going to be propounded.’

Or, ‘*Heart*’ may be taken as standing for the *Veda*; the Veda, duly
studied and borne within the heart in the form of ideas and conceptions,
is called ‘heart.’

The present statement refers to the following three cases:—(1) when a
person, without much thought, undertakes an action, through sheer
impulse,—it must be right; this is what is meant by ‘sanctioned by the
heart’;—(2) the same expression also includes the case when one acts
according to custom, depending upon the dictum ‘that is the right path
by which great men have gone’;—(3) when ‘learned’ persons, without any
ulterior motives, are found to act in a certain manner they are never
blamed for it, and even when people do not find their action authorised
(by the Veda), they accept the fact that it must be based upon the Veda.
In every way the present verse makes men have recourse to activity.

Other people explain this verse as serving the purpose of providing a
general definition of ‘Dharma’; the sense being—‘that which is done by
such persons should be regarded as *Dharma*’; this definition is
applicable to all forms of *Dharma*,—that which is directly prescribed
by the *Veda*, that which is laid down in the *Smṛti* and also that
which is got at from Right Usage. In accordance with this explanation,
however, the right reading would be—‘*yaḥ elaih sevyate tam dharmam
nibodhata*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Hṛdayenābhyanujñātaḥ*’—The term ‘*hṛdaya*’ stands for the
*heart*—conscience. The phrase stands for what is spoken of later on, in
verse 6 below, as ‘*ātmanastuṣṭih*’ Medhātithi has suggested that
‘*hṛdaya*’ may stand for the Veda.

*Medhātithi* (p. 48. l. 15). ‘*Mīmāṃsātaḥ*’—This refers to Mīmāṃsāta
Sūtra I. i—2 ‘*Chodanālakṣaṇo'artho dharmaḥ*.’

This verse has been quoted in the *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 80), in
corroboration of the definition of *Dharma* provided by Viśvāmitra, that
‘*Dharma* is that which when done is praised by good men learned in the
scriptures.’ From this it follows that according to this writer
‘*hṛdayenāvhyanujñātaḥ*’ means the samething as ‘*Yam āryāḥ
praśaṃsanti*’ in Viśvāmitra’s definition.—It is quoted in Hemādri
(Vrata, p. 10), which explains *hṛdayenābhyanujñātaḥ* as ‘which is
definitely known in the mind, for certain,’ find ‘*adveṣarāgibhiḥ*’ as
‘persons free from improper love and hate—in the *Vīramitrodaya*
(*Paribhāṣā*, p. 80), which adds the following notes—This verse supplies
a definition of *Dharma* in general. ‘*Vidvadbhiḥ*’ those conversant
with what is contained in the Veda;—‘*Sadbhiḥ*,’ those who have the
right knowledge of things;—these two qualifications are meant to
indicate that ‘Dharma’ is rightly known by means of the
Veda;—‘*adveṣarāgibhiḥ*,’ free from such love and hate as are conducive
to evil this is meant to indicate that *Dharma* is that which is not
conducive to any undesirable effects; —‘ *hṛdayenabhyanujñātaḥ*
indicates that Dharma is conducive to all that is good; as it is only
the good to which men’s minds are attracted:—thus then the complete
definition of Dharma, as indicated by the text, is that it is that
which, not being conducive to any evil effects, is known through the
Veda as conducive to good. The three qualifications serve the purpose of
excluding such acts as the performance of the *Śyena sacrifice*.—This
definition of ‘Dharma,’ ‘Right,’ also implies that of ‘*Adharma*,’
‘Wrong,’ as that which is known through the Veda as conducive to evil.’

This is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 13); and in the
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 156).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha, Dharmaśāstra*—‘Dharma is that which is enjoined in Śruti and
Smṛti.’

*Jaimini, Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra*, 1.1.2.—‘Dharma is that which is described in
the Veda as conducive to good.’

*Kaṇāda, Vaiśeṣika-Sūtra*, 1.2.2.—‘That is Dharma which brings about
prosperity and the highest good.’

*Āpastamba, Dharma-Sūtra*, 1.20.7.—‘That the doing whereof gentlemen
praise is *Dharma*, and that which they deprecate is *Adharma*.’

*Kumārila, Ślokavārtika*, 2.14.—‘The fact of these acts being conducive
to good is, in every case, learnt from the Veda; and in this sense are
they regarded as *Dharma*; and for this reason Dharma is not perceptible
by the senses.’

*Viśvāmitra* (quoted in Parāśaramādhava, p. 80).—‘That the doing of
which men learned in the scriptures praise is *Dharma*; that which they
deprecate is called *Adharma*.’

Under all these definitions ‘Dharma’ is the name of the ‘meritorious
*act*’; but the term has also been used in the sense of the *merit*
acquired by the doing of the act.

Nyāya view (quoted in Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā, p.29).—‘Dharma is that
quality of man which is brought about by the performance of the enjoined
act: *Adharma* is that quality of man which is brought about by the
performance of the forbidden act.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	Learn that sacred law which is followed by men learned (in the Veda) and assented to in their hearts by the virtuous, who are ever exempt from hatred and inordinate affection.
</details>
