+++
title = "005 तेषु सम्यग्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Behaving in the right manner, in regard to these (desires), a man attains the position of Immortals; and even in this world he obtains all the desires that he may have thought of.—(5)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तेषु** कामेषु **सम्यग्** वर्तितव्यम् । का पुनः सम्यग्वृत्तिः । यद् यथाश्रुतं तत् तथैवानुष्ठेयम् । नित्येषु फलं नाभिसंधेयम्, अश्रुतत्वात् । काम्येषु त्व् अनिषेधः, तेषां तथाश्रुतत्वात् । फलसाधनतयैव तानि विधितो ऽवगम्यन्ते । फलानिच्छोस् तदनुष्ठानम् अश्रुतकरणं[^१६] स्यात् । नित्येषु फलाभिसंधिर् व्यामोह एव । न ह्य् अभिसंधिमात्रात् प्रमाणतो ऽनवगते फलसाधनत्वे फलम् उत्पद्यते । एवं कुर्वन् **गच्छति** प्राप्नोत्य् **अमरलोकताम्** । अमराः देवाः, तेषां लोकः स्वर्गः । तन्निवासात् अमरेषु लोकशब्दः स्थानस्थानिनोर् अभेदात् "मञ्चाः क्रोशन्ति" इतिवत् । तेनायं समासः- अमराश् च ते लोकाश् च अमरलोकाः, तद्भावः अमरलोकता । देवजनत्वं प्राप्नोति देवत्वं प्राप्नोतीत्य् अर्थः । वृत्तानुरोधाद् एवम् उक्तम् । अथ वा, अमरांल् लोकयति पश्यत्य् अमरलोकः । "कर्मन्य् अण्[^१७]" (पाण् ३.२.१) । तदन्ताद् भवप्रत्ययः । देवदर्शी संपद्यते । अनेनापि प्रकारेण स्वर्गप्राप्तिर् एवोक्ता भवति । अथ वा, अमर इव लोक्यते लोके ।


[^१७]:
     J: kamaṇyam


[^१६]:
     M G 1st ed.: -kāraṇaṃ

- अर्थवादश् चायम् । नात्र स्वर्गः फलत्वेन विधीयते, नित्यानां फलाभावात्, काम्यानां च नानाफलश्रवणात् । तेन स्वर्गप्राप्त्या शास्त्रानुष्ठानसंपत्तिर् एवोच्यते लक्षणया । यद् अर्थं कर्मणाम्[^१८] अनुष्ठानं तत् संपद्यत इत्य् अर्थः । तत्र नित्यानां प्रत्यवायानुत्पत्तिर् विध्यर्थसंपत्तिर् वा प्रयोजनम् । काम्येषु तु **यथासंकल्पितान्** यथाश्रुतं संकल्पितान् । प्रयोगकाले यस्य कर्मणो यत् फलं श्रुतं तत् संकल्प्य अभिसंधाय मनसा कामयित्वा "इदम् अहम् अतः फलं प्राप्नुयाम्" इति, ततः **सर्वान् कामान्** काम्यान् अर्थान् **समश्नुते** प्राप्नोति । 


[^१८]:
     M G 1st ed.: kamaṇy

- अतः परिहृता संकटापत्तिः, यतो न सर्वविषयः कामो निषिध्यते । किं तर्हि, नित्येषु फलाभिलाषलक्षणः । साधनसंपत्तिस् तु काम्यैव ।

- ब्रह्मवादिनस् तु सौर्यादीनां निषेधर्थं कामात्मतेति मन्यन्ते । फलार्थितया क्रियमाणा बन्धात्मका भवन्ति, निष्कामस् तु ब्रह्मार्पणन्यायेन कुर्वन् मुच्यते । तद् उक्तं भगवता कृष्णद्वैपायनेन "मा कर्मफलहेतुर् भूः" (भ्ग् २.४७) । तथा-

- साधनानाम् अकृत्स्नत्वान् मौर्ख्यात् कर्मकृतस् तथा ।

- फलस्य चाभिसंधानाद् अपवित्रो विधिः स्मृतः ॥ इति ।

बहवश् चात्र व्याख्याविकल्पाः, असारत्वात् तु न प्रदर्शिताः ॥ २.५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

To the above *Pūrvapakṣa*, the Author replies in this verse.

\[What is meant is that\] one should behave *in the right manner in
regard to these*—desires.

“What is this *right behaviour*?”

It consists in doing an act exactly in the manner in which it is found
mentioned in the scriptures. That is, in regard to the compulsory acts
one should not think of rewards at all, for the simple reason that no
rewards have been mentioned in connection with them; while in regard to
the voluntary acts, there is no prohibition of thinking of rewards, for
the simple reason that these acts are actually mentioned as bringing
definite rewards; in fact what we know of these acts from the scriptural
injunctions is that they are the means of obtaining certain rewards; so
that the performance of these by a man who has no desire for those
rewards would be doing something that is not enjoined in the scriptures
at all. As regards the compulsory acts however, to think of rewards
would be a pure mistake; for when the acts have not been prescribed as
leading to any results, no results could proceed from them by merely the
man’s seeking for them.

By doing so \[ *i.e*., by behaving rightly in regard to desires\] one
*goes to*—attains—*the position of Immortals*. ‘Immortals’ are the Gods;
their ‘position’ is Heaven; and by reason of the Gods residing in
Heaven, the term ‘position’ is applied to the gods themselves, the
*position* being identified with the *occupier of the position*; just as
we have in the expression ‘the elevated sheds are shouting’ \[where the
‘sheds’ stand for the men occupying them\]. Hence the compound
‘*Amaraloka*’ is to be expounded as a *Karmadhāraya*—‘the immortal
positions’; and with the abstract affix ‘*tat'* we have the form
‘*amaralokatā*’ So the meaning is that ‘he obtains the character of a
divine being,’ ‘he attains divinity.’ The author has made use of this
expression in view of metrical exigencies.

Or, the compound ‘*amaralokatā*’ may he explained as *one who
sees*—‘*lokayati*’—*the gods*—‘*amarān*’; the term ‘*loka*’ being
derived from the root ‘*loka*’ with the passive affix ‘*aṇ*’ (according
to Pāṇini 3.2.1); and then the abstract affix *tal* added to it; so that
the meaning is that ‘he becomes capable of seeing the Gods’; and this
also means that he attains heaven.

Or again, the expression may mean that ‘he is looked upon as a
God’—‘*amara iva lokyate*’—among men.

This whole passage is mere declamatory Arthavāda; and if does not lay
down Heaven as the result actually following from the action spoken of;
because as a matter of fact, the compulsory acts do not lead to any
results at all, while the voluntary acts are prescribed as leading to
diverse results. So that what the ‘attaining of heaven’ spoken of in the
text means is the due fulfilment of what is enjoined in the scriptures;
which is only an indirect way of saying that ‘that particular end is
attained with a view to which the action was done.’ Thus in the case of
the compulsory acts, the end in view would be either the avoiding of the
sin (that might be incurred by the omission of the act), or the due
fulfilment of what has been enjoined in the scriptures; and in the case
of the voluntary acts, the end is the attaining of *rewards thought of,
i.e*., those contemplated as mentioned in the scriptures; when a man is
going to perform an act, he thinks, in his mind, of that reward which
has been mentioned in the scriptures as following from that act; having
thought of that reward, he has a desire for it—‘May I obtain this reward
by the doing of this act’; and then he obtains *all those
desires*—*i.e*., the desirable things.

In the manner above described we have set aside the difficulty (that had
been set up by the Pūrvapakṣa); for what the text prohibits is not the
desire for each and everything, but the entertaining of desires only in
connection with the compulsory acts; and in regard to these also there
must be desire for the obtaining of things necessary for the due
performance of them.

The *Brahmavādins* (Vedāntins) however regard the words ‘it is not right
to be absorbed in desires’ as a prohibition of the *Saurya* and all such
other acts as are laid down as bringing rewards; and their reason is
that all actions done with a view to rewards become setters of bondage;
and it is only when an act is done without any thought of rewards—doing
it simply as an offering to Brahman—that the man becomes released. This
is what the revered Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyana has declared in the words (*a*)
‘May there be no action done with a view to rewards’ (*Bhagavadgītā*,
2.47),—and again, ‘The perform nce of an act becomes vitiated, (*a*) by
the incompleteness of accessories, (*b*) by the illiteracy of the
performer, and (*c*) by the thought of rewards.’

Various explanations have been offered of the present verse; but we have
omitted them because they are of no importance.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha, Smṛti*, 1-2.—‘The righteous man who acts with full knowledge
is highly praised among men and after death, attains heavenly regions.’

*Āpastaṃba, Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.2-9.—‘When the religious student acts with
concentrated mind, then alone are his aots fruitful.’

*Ibid*, 2.2.2.—‘For all castes, the highest happiness is attained only
when they are engaged only in their own duties.’ *Ibid*, 2.23.7.—‘Thus
alone are all desires fulfilled.’

*Ibid*, 2.23-12.—‘They win Heaven till the very dissolution.’

*Gautama, Dharmasūtra*, 11-31.—‘Men of all castes and in all
life-stages, adhering to their own duties, on death, enjoy the fruits of
their acts, and then become born in a pleasant country, and in families
of high castes, excellent learning, character and intelligence.’

*Gautama*, 27-54.—‘One who knows his duty wins by his knowledge and
adherence, the heavenly regions.’

*Baudhāyana, Dharmasūtra*, 1.3.13.—‘In this manner great sages attain
the highest position of Prajāpati.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	He who persists in discharging these (prescribed duties) in the right manner, reaches the deathless state and even in this (life) obtains (the fulfilment of) all the desires that he may have conceived.
</details>
