+++
title = "009 श्रुति-स्मृत्य्-उदितन् धर्मम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the man performing the duty laid down by the revealed word and the recollections obtains fame here, and after death, unsurpassed happiness.—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यो नास्तिकतया वैदिकानि निष्फलानि कर्माणीति व्यामुह्य न तदनुष्ठाने प्रवर्तेत, तस्य प्रवृत्त्यर्थं सुहृद् भूत्वा दृष्टफलप्रदर्शनं करोति । तिष्ठतु तावद् अन्यत् फलम् । श्रुतौ स्मृतिषु च यद् **उदितम्** उक्तं धर्माख्यं कर्म तद् **अनुतिष्ठन्न्** **इह **अश्मिंल् लोके यावज् जीवति तावत् **कीर्तिं** प्रशस्यतां पूज्यतां सौभाग्यं लभते । न्याय्ये पथि स्थितो महापुण्यो ऽयम् इति सर्वेण पूज्यते । प्रियश् च सर्वस्य भवति । **प्रेत्य** देहान्तरे यस्माद् अन्यद् उत्तमं नास्ति तत् सुखं प्राप्नोति । प्रायेण स्वर्गकामस्याधिकारः, निरतिशया च प्रीतिः स्वर्गः, तत उच्यते **अनुत्तमम्** इति । तस्मान् नास्ति कस्यापि दृष्टफलार्थिनो ऽत्रैव प्रवृत्तिः प्रयुक्तेत्य्[^६४] एवंपरम् एतत् ॥ २.९ ॥


[^६४]:
     DK (5: 611): pravṛttir yuktety
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

There might be some one who, being an unbeliever, might form the
misconception that the acts laid down in the Veda are fruitless, and
omit to do them; hence with a view to induce such a man to undertake the
performance of those acts, the Author, placing himself in the position
of a friend, proceeds to indicate the. perceptible results that follow
from the acts in question, to say nothing of other kinds of results.

The man who performs the act, known as ‘duty,’ ‘Dharma,’—which is ‘*laid
down by the Revealed Word and the Recollections*—obtains ‘*here*,’ in
this wold, as long as he lives, ‘*fame*,’ praise, honour, regard; that
is, all men respect him and love him as one ‘who is firm in the rightful
path and highly virtuous.’

‘*After death*,’—in another body—he obtains that ‘happiness’ superior to
which there is no other happiness. As a matter of fact, almost all the
acts are prescribed in the Veda as to be done by one who desires Heaven;
and ‘Heaven’ stands for ‘unsurpassed happiness’; hence it is that the
author speaks of ‘unsurpassed happiness.’

For these reasons, it is only right that the unbeliever also, who seeks
for nothing but visible results, should undertake the performance of the
acts in question. This is the purport of the text.—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 14);—in the *Vīramitrodaya*
(Paribhāṣā, p. 61), which explains that, ‘*anuttamam sukham*’ stands for
the rewards that are spoken of in connection with each act;—and in the
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 16b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Atri-Saṃhitā*, 16.—‘By me has been described that Dharma in which
remaining firm, men of the various castes acquire reputation in the
world and after death attain the highest condition.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2.2.5.—‘In course of evolution, the man, by the
residue of the results of his past acts, obtains his caste, his- body,
his complexion, strength, intelligence, knowledge and also other things
and activities; and in its revolution, this process brings him happiness
in both worlds.’ *Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2.2.7.—‘Through acts conducive
to sin, one becomes born in undesirable families.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 11-31.—‘People of various castes and in various
stages of life, remaining firm in their duties, on death, enjoy the
fruits of their acts, and by reason of the residue of those, become born
again in a good family of superior caste, endowed with long life,
learning, wealth, happiness and intelligence.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 1.2.—‘The man who performs his duties with due
knowledge becomes highly praiseworthy in the world, and after death
attains Heaven.’

*Dakṣa-Smṛti*, 2.66.—‘The Householder, ever intent on his own duties,
partakes of Heaven.’

*Laghu-Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 2.17.—‘Whatever has been prescribed in the Śruti
and in the Smṛti,—all this should be done by the Housoholder; otherwise,
he becomes open to censure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

009	For that man who obeys the law prescribed in the revealed texts and in the sacred tradition, gains fame in this (world) and after death unsurpassable bliss.
</details>
