+++
title = "011 यो ऽवमन्येत"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a twice-born person, relying upon the science of dialectics, should disregard these two sources, he should be cast out by good men,—the detractor of the Veda being an infidel.—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

असत्य् अप्रामाण्यहेतौ[^७५] वेदस्य **यो** द्विजो **हेतुशास्त्राश्रयात्,** हेतुशास्त्रं नास्तिकतर्कशास्त्रं बौद्ध्चार्वाकादिशास्त्रम्, यत्र वेदो ऽधर्मायेति पुनः पुनर् उद्घुष्यते, तादृशं तर्कम् आश्रित्य यो ऽवज्ञां कुर्यात् श्रुतौ स्मृतौ च, केनचिद् अकार्यान् निवर्त्येत "मैवं कार्षीः, प्रतिषिद्धं वेदेन" इति, तम् अनादृत्य चिकीर्षेत्- "किं नाम[^७६] यदि वेदे स्मृतिषु वा प्रतिषिद्धम्, न हि किंचित्[^७७] तयोः सम्यक् प्रामाण्यम् अस्ति" इति कथयेत्, मनसा वा विचिन्तयेत् । तर्कशास्त्रेषु निबद्धादरो यदि दृश्येत, **स साधुभिः** शिष्टैर्[^७८] **बहिःकार्यः** तिरस्कार्यस् तत्तत्कार्येभ्यो याजनाध्यापनातिथिसत्कारादिभ्यः । क्रियाविशेषस्यानिर्देशाद् विद्वदर्हेभ्य[^७९] इति गम्यते । यतो ऽविदान् सम्यगसंस्कृतात्मा तार्किकगन्धितयैवं व्यवहरति । आसु च क्रियासु विदान् अधिक्रियते । अत एव पूर्वश्लोके विचार ईदृशः प्रतिषिध्यते यतस् तदवज्ञानपरतया क्रियते, न तु[^८०] यतस् तदर्थविशेषजिज्ञासया । एवमर्थम् एव हेतुम् आह- **नास्तिको वेदनिन्दकः** । अतश् च पूर्वपक्षे यो वेदस्याप्रामाण्यं ब्रूयान् नासौ नास्तिकः स्यात् । सिद्धान्तदार्ढ्यार्थम् एव पूर्वपक्षे हेतुकथनम् । **वेदनिन्दक** इति स्मृतिग्रहणं न कृतम् । तुल्यत्वेनोभयोः प्रकृतत्वाद् अन्यतरनिर्देशेनैव सिद्धम् उभस्यापि ग्रहणम् इत्य् अभिप्रायः ॥ २.११ ॥


[^८०]:
     M G: nanu


[^७९]:
     M G 1st ed.: -arhābhya


[^७८]:
     M G: śiṣyair


[^७७]:
     M G: kiṃ for na hi kiṃcit


[^७६]:
     M G add: vede


[^७५]:
     M G 1st ed.: asatyaprāmāṇyahetor; J G 2nd ed.: asatyāprāmāṇyahetor (I follow DK 5: 105)

_यस् त्व् एतम् अर्थम् अविदित्वा, वेदशब्दस्य विवक्षितार्थत्वम् एव मत्वा, स्मृतिनिन्दकस्य न बहिष्कारः, अनेन वेदनिन्दकस्यैव विहित_[^८१]_ इति प्रतिपद्येत, तं प्रत्याह ।_


[^८१]:
     G: vihitaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

On the ground of ‘untruthfulness’ and ‘unreliability’ *if a twice-born
person, relying upon the science of dialectics* the ‘science of
dialectics’ here stands for the polemical works written by Atheists,
treatises of *Bauddhas* and *Charvākas*, in which it is repeatedly
proclaimed that “the Veda is conducive to sin”;—relying upon such a
science, if one should scorn the Veda; *i.e*., when advised by some one
to desist from a certain course of action which is sinful according to
the Veda and the Smṛti, in the words—‘Do not do this, it is prohibited
by the Veda,’—if he disregards this advice and persists in doing it,
saying, ‘what if it is prohibited in the Veda or in the Smṛtis? They are
not at all authoritative’;—even without saying this, if he should even
think in this manner,—and if he is found to pay much attention to the
science of dialectics;—such a person *should he cast out by the
good*—despised by all cultured persons—out of such acts as ‘officiating
at sacrifices,’ ‘teaching,’ ‘honours of a guest’ and so forth. Since the
text does not specify the acts (from which the man should be kept out),
it follows that he should be kept out of all those acts that are fit for
the learned. And the reason for this lies in the fact that it is only
the ignorant man, whose mind is uncultured and who smacks of the
polemic, that can speak as above (in deprecation of the Veda); and to
the said acts (of officiating, etc.) it is only the learned man that can
be entitled. It is in view of this that such ‘criticism’ has been
prohibited in the preceding verse,—such criticism being due to want or
respect,—and it does not deprecate such inquiry as might be instituted
for the purpose of elucidating the true meaning of the Veda.

It is in view of all this that the author states the reason for what he
has asserted—‘*The* *detractor of the Veda* *being an infidel*.’ Thus
the man, who would set forth arguments in support of the view that ‘the
Veda is unauthoritative,’ only by way of a *primâ* *facie* statement,
would not he an ‘infidel’; because such statement of the arguments would
he made only for the purpose of strengthening the final conclusion (that
the Veda is authoritative).

The text speaking of tin; ‘*detractor of the Veda*,’ has not mentioned
the *Smṛti*; hut the idea is that both stand on the same footing, and
both equally form the subject-matter of the context; hence the mention
of any one of them implies both.

Some people might however take the term ‘Veda’ (in the expression
‘detractor of the Veda’) to be actually restricted to the *Veda only*,
and they would thence conclude that ‘the detractor of *Smṛtis*’ should
not be cast out, the casting out in this verse being declared for the
‘detractor of the Veda’ only. With a view to such people the Author adds
the following verse.—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Hetuśāstrāśrayāt*’.—‘Relying upon the argumentative science of the
Bauddhas, Cārvākas &c.’ (Medhātithi);—‘Relying on methods of reasoning
directed against the Veda’ (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa).

The argumentative person is always decried: see *e*. *g*. 4.30, where
the ‘*Hetuka*’ is described as not fit to be honoured; the ‘*Hetuka*’ is
mentionod in 12. 111. as a person who must be a member of the *Pariṣad*;
though in the latter text the term has been explained as ‘one
well-versed in the principles of Mīmāṃsā and the Śāstras’ (see
*Mitākṣarā* on 3. 301, p. 1384).

‘*Nāstiko vedanindakaḥ*’—see *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 424)
where we read—‘The detracting of the Veda is of three kinds—(1) The
first is that which consists in seeking to prove the untrustworthy
character of the Veda by means of arguments culled from *Bauddha*,
*Jaina* and other treatises;—this has been described by Yājñavalkya as
being equal in heinousness to the murdering of a Brāhmaṇa. (2) The
second consists in neglecting the acts laid down in the Veda and Śrutis,
through one’s tendency to wranglings and disputations;—it is this that
is referred to by Manu under 2.11, who further regards it as equal in
heinousness to the drinking of wine. (3) The third consists in lack of
due faith,—the acts laid down being done only through fear of popular
odium, and not through any faith in them; tins has been mentioned among
*Minor Sins*.

This verse has been quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 4) which
reads ‘*ubhe*’ for ‘*mūle*’ and explains it as ‘*Śruti* and *Smṛti*’;
for ‘*śrayāt*’ it reads ‘*shraya*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Hārīta-Smṛti*, 7.21,—‘That person is a *Nāstika* who decries what is
said in the Veda, who does not discriminate between virtue and vice and
who does not admit the existence of the other world.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1-227.—‘The insulting of the Teacher, the decrying of the
Veda, the killing of a friend, all this should be regarded as equal to
the killing of the Brāhmaṇa.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

011	Every twice-born man, who, relying on the Institutes of dialectics, treats with contempt those two sources (of the law), must be cast out by the virtuous, as an atheist and a scorner of the Veda.
</details>
