+++
title = "013 अर्थ-कामेष्व् असक्तानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The knowledge of Dharma is ordained for those who are not addicted to the pursuit of wealth and pleasures; and for those seeking for the knowledge of Dharma, the Revealed Word is the highest authority.—(13)


“When the act is endowed with a certain faculty, it does not lose that faculty, even though it may be performed with some other end in view; it must always bring about its natural effects; e.g., even though one may drink poison, with the idea that it is an efficacious medicine, yet it does not fail to kill him. Similarly even though the act may be done with a view to some visible reward, yet it cannot fail to bring about the invisible results mentioned in ' the scriptures. Why then should you have this aversion, which makes you assert that an act should not be undertaken with a view to worldly advancement?”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गोभूमिहिरण्यादिधनम् **अर्थः** । तत्र सक्तिस् तात्पर्येण तदर्जनरक्षणार्थं कृषिसेवादिव्यापारकरणम् । **कामः** स्त्रीसंभोगः । तत्र सक्तिः, नित्यं तदासेवनं तदङ्गानां च गीतवादित्रादीनाम् । तद्वर्जितानां पुरुषाणां **धर्मज्ञानं** धर्मावबोधो **विधीयते** विशेषेण धीयते, व्यवस्थितं भवति । "धीङ् आधाने"[^८२] (ध्प् ११३६) इत्य् अस्यैतद् रूपम् ।


[^८२]:
     M G: dhā ādhāre. Madhav Deshpande notes in private communication: "The Dhatupatha as given in the NSP edition of the Siddhanta-Kaumudi with Tattvabodhini, 7th edn 1933, p. 734, lists two different roots, 1) डुधाञ् धारणपोषणयो: (जुहोत्यादि), 2) धीङ् आधारे (दिवादि). While धीयते can be a passive form of धा-दधाति, it can be a simple middle form of धी-धीयते from the 4th conjugation. It appears that Medhatithi prefers the latter interpretation."

- <u>किम्</u> अर्थं पुनस् तत्र सक्तानां न[^८३] भवति धर्मज्ञानम्, यावता ते ऽपि यथाक्षणं[^८४] तदविरोधिन्य् अवसरे भोजनादाव् इतिहासश्रवणाद् अन्योपदेशात् समाचाराद् वा शक्नुवन्ति ज्ञातुम् । इत्य् अत आह- **धर्मं जिज्ञासमानानाम्** इति । मुख्यं प्रमाणं धर्मे वेदः, स च तैर् न शक्यो ज्ञातुम् । अत्यन्तदुर्विज्ञानो ह्य् असौ निगमनिरुक्तव्याकरणतर्कपुराणमीमांसाशास्त्रश्रवणम् अपेक्षते स्वार्थबोधे ।


[^८४]:
     M G: yathālakṣaṇaṃ


[^८३]:
     M G omit: na

- न चेयान् ग्रन्थराशिः सर्वव्यापारपरित्यागेन विना शक्य आसादयितुम् । समाचारेतिहासादेः कतिपये धर्मा अवगम्यन्ते, न वेदादिवत् समस्ताङ्गयुक्तो ज्योतिष्टोमादिप्रयोगः । अत उक्तम्- **प्रमाणं परमं श्रुतिः** । न तु समाचारादेः प्रामाण्यापकर्षः । तद् उक्तम्-

- यो ऽहेर् इव धनाद् भीतो मिष्टान्नाच् च विषाद् इव ।

- राक्षसीभ्य इव स्त्रीभ्यः स विद्याम् अधिगच्छति ॥ (म्स्सं ४१२१)

- <u>अपरे</u> त्व् **अर्थकामा**[^८५] दृष्टफलैषिण उच्यन्ते । तत्र **सक्तानां** पूजाख्यात्यादिकामानां दृष्टफलार्थितया लोकपक्तिमात्रप्रयोजनानां न **धर्मज्ञानं** धर्मानुष्ठानं **विधीयते** उपदिश्यते ।


[^८५]:
     M G 1st ed.: arthakāma

- ज्ञायते ऽस्मिन्न् इति ज्ञानम् अनुष्ठानम् इत्य् उच्यते । अनुष्ठीयमानो हि धर्मो व्यक्ततरो भवति, शास्त्रावगमकालतो ऽपि । अतो ऽनुष्ठानं धर्मज्ञानम् उच्यते । अत एतद् उक्तं भवति । यद्य् अपि धर्मानुष्ठानाल् लोकपक्त्यादि दृष्टं प्रयोजनम् उपलभ्यते,[^८६] तथापि न तत्सिद्धिपरतया तत्र प्रवर्तितव्यम्, किं तर्हि, शास्त्रेण तच् चोदितम् इति कृत्वा । तथा च प्रवृत्तौ यदि दृष्टम् अपि भवति, भवतु, न विचार्यते । तथा च श्रुतिः स्वाध्यायस्य दृष्टं फलम् अनुवदति- "यशो लोकपक्तिः" इति, "लोकः पच्यमानश् चतुर्भिर् एनं भुनक्ति, अर्चया दानेनाज्येयतया[^८७] चावध्यतया" इत्यादि (श्ब् ११.५.७.१) । श्लोकश् चात्र भवति ।


[^८७]:
     M G J: dānenājeyatayā


[^८६]:
     M G: upalakṣyate

- यथेक्षुहेतोर् इह सेचितं पयस् तृणानि वल्लीर् अपि च प्रसिञ्चति ।

- तथा नरो धर्मपथेन संचरन् यशश् च कामांश् च वसूनि चाश्नुते ॥

- <u>ननु</u> च यस्य यः स्वभावो ऽवगतः सो ऽन्योद्देशेनाप्य् अनुष्ठीयमानो न स्वभावच् च्यवते, करोत्य् एव तत्कार्यम् । यथा विषं औषधोद्देशेनापि पीतं हन्त्य् एव । अतो दृष्टार्थतयाप्य् अनुष्ठीयमानानि कर्माणि शास्त्रीयाण्य् अदृष्टार्थान्य् अपि भविष्यन्ति । को भवतो मत्सरो लोकावर्जनहेतुतया न प्रवर्तितव्यम् इति येनात्थ । अत आह । **धर्मं जिज्ञासमानानाम्** । वेदो धर्मे **प्रमाणम्** । तेन चैतद् उक्तम्- दृष्टफलकामार्थानां नादृष्टं भवति । न केवलम् अदृष्टं न भवति, यावत् प्रतिषिद्धसेवनाद् अधर्मो ऽपि भवति ॥ २.१३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Wealth*’ stands for cattle, land, gold and so forth, and ‘*addiction*’
to it means being entirely taken up with the undertaking of cultivation,
service, etc., for the purpose of acquiring and accumulating wealth.

‘*Pleasures*’ stands for *sexual pleasures*; and ‘addiction’ to these
means constant recourse to it, as also to its accompaniments in the
shape of singing and music, etc.

For people who are devoid of these (wealth and pleasures), ‘*the
knowledge of Dharma*,’ the true understanding of *Dharma*, ‘*is
ordained*,’ specially propounded, accomplished; the verb ‘*vidhīyate*’
is derived from the root ‘*dhīṅ*’ to *accomplish*.

*Objection*.—How is it that people addicted to wealth and pleasures can
have no knowledge of ‘*Dharma*?’ In fact such persons also, as time
permits them, can obtain some knowledge of ‘*Dharma*,’—by listening at
the time of eating and at such times as do not interfere with their
pursuit of wealth and pleasure, to stories and to the precept or example
of others (who know *Dharma*).”

In view of the above objection, the author has added the words—‘*for
those who seek the knowledge of Dharma,’ etc*. The chief authority for
*Dharma* is the Veda; and the Veda can never be understood by the
persons referred to. It is extremely difficult to comprehend and for its
due comprehension it requires the thorough study of the sciences of
*Nigama* (Vedic commentaries), *Nirukla* (Philology), *Vyākaraṇa*
(Grammar), *Tarka* (Logic) *Purāṇa* (History) and *Mīnāmsā* (Exigetics).
And this entire mass of literature can never be acquired by a man unless
he renounces all other activities. What can be learnt from stories and
examples are only a few stray *Dharmas*, and not the entire body of
Dharma, in the shape of the performance of the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other
sacrifices, along with all its accessory details, which can be learnt
only from the Veda and the other sources of Dharma. It is in view of all
this that the text says—‘*the Revealed Word is the highest authority*.’
This how ever is not meant to take away the force of ‘Example’ as a
source of knowledge.

What is stated in the text is corroborated by the following well-known
saying—‘He alone acquires learning who shuns wealth like snake,
sweetmeats like poison, and women like evil spirits?



\[ *Another explanation of the verse*.\]

According to others again the expression ‘*arthakāma*’ stands for
*hankering after visible rewards*—and for people ‘addicted’ to
these,—those who hanker after honour, fame, etc., and who, seeking after
visible results, have no other end in life save worldly advancement—‘the
knowledge of Dharma,’ *i.e*., ‘performance of Dharma,’—is not
‘ordained,’ taught. The term ‘*jñāna*’ (’knowledge’) stands for’that in
which the act becomes recognised’ (*jñāyate asmin*), *i.e*., its
performance; it is only when the *Dharma* is performed that it becomes
clearly manifest, clearer indeed than that comprehended at the time that
the scriptures are studied. It is for this reason that it is the
*performance* that is spoken of as ‘*jñāna*,’ ‘knowledge.’

What the text means therefore is this:—Even though the performance of
Dharma brings worldly advancement, yet one should not undertake it
entirely with a view to that fame; it should be undertaken with the sole
idea that it is prescribed by the scriptures. The act having been done
with this idea, if some visible result also follows, it may do so, but
it is not what is thought of by the man. In fact the

Veda itself describes the result following from Vedic study as ‘fame and
worldly advancement,’ in the passage—‘the world progressing endows him
with four things—honour, gifts, freedom from taxes and freedom from
death.’ To the same effect is the following saying—‘The water supplied
for the growth of sugar-cane waters also the grasses and creepers, in
the same manner when a man treads the path of *Dharma*, he also obtains
fame, pleasure and riches.’

*Objection*.—

> “When the act is endowed with a certain faculty, it does not lose that
> faculty, even though it may be performed with some other end in view;
> it must always bring about its natural effects; *e.g*., even though
> one may drink poison, with the idea that it is an efficacious
> medicine, yet it does not fail to kill him. Similarly even though the
> act may be done with a view to some visible reward, yet it cannot fail
> to bring about the invisible results mentioned in ' the scriptures.
> Why then should you have this aversion, which makes you assert that an
> act should not be undertaken with a view to worldly advancement?”

It is in view of this objection that the text adds—‘*For those seeking
for the knowledge of Dharma, the Revealed Word is the highest
authority*.’ And what this means is that ‘those who seek for visible
rewards do not obtain any invisible reward,—and it is not only that he
does not obtain the invisible result, he commits sin also by being
addicted to what is prohibited.’—(13)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vidhīyate*’.—Medhātithi puts forward a second explananation of this.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2.20.1.—‘In the performance of duties one shall
not allow considerations of worldly things.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1-2.7.—‘In all countries one should imitate the
behaviour of all such good men as are self-controlled, experienced, free
from greed and haughtiness.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1-30.9.—‘In cases of conflict what is laid down
in the Śruti is more authoritative.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.6.—‘When there is a conflict between two
equally authoritative texts, there is option.’

*Jaimini-Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra*, 1.3.3.—‘When a Smṛti conflicts with Śruti, it
has no authority; where it does not conflict, there is presumption of
corroborative Śruti.

Also see the Comparative notes for [Verse 2.6 (Sources of Knowledge of
Dharma)].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

013	The knowledge of the sacred law is prescribed for those who are not given to the acquisition of wealth and to the gratification of their desires; to those who seek the knowledge of the sacred law the supreme authority is the revelation (Sruti).
</details>
