+++
title = "015 उदिते ऽनुदिते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At sunrise, or before sunrise, or at early dawn,—the sacrificial act may be performed at any time,—such is the pronouncement of the Veda.—(15)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उदाहरणम् इदं समनन्तरप्रदर्शिते[^८९] विरोधे । य एते त्रयः काला इतरेतरनिन्दया होमस्य विहिताः, तत्रायम् अर्थः श्रुतिवाक्यानाम्- **सर्वथा वर्तते यज्ञः** । सर्वप्रकारो होमः प्रवर्तते, प्रवर्तनीय इत्य् अर्थः । या उदितहोमनिन्दा सा न तत्प्रतिषेधार्था, किं तर्ह्य् अनुदितहोमविध्यर्था । एवम् इतरत्रापि । तेनायम् अर्थ उक्तो भवति । **सर्वथा** कर्तव्य एतेषां कालानाम् अन्यतमस्मिन् काले । तत्र यस्मिन् कृतस् तत्र संपूर्णः शास्त्रार्थो भवति । इतीयं **वैदिकी श्रुतिर्** एवंपरा । अस्मिन्न् अर्थे ऽस्यास् तात्पर्यम्, न पुनर् निन्द्यमानप्रतिषेधे । 


[^८९]:
     M G: idam anantara-

- **यज्ञः** होमः, अत्राग्निहोत्राख्यो ऽभिप्रेतः, यागहोमयोर् यतो नात्यन्तं भेदः । देवताम् उद्दिश्य द्रव्यस्य स्वत्वत्यागः "नेदं मम, देवताया इदम्" इति यागः । एतच् च स्वरूपं होमे ऽप्य् अस्ति । अयं तु विशेषः- द्रव्यस्य[^९०] होमे प्रक्षेपः अधिकः, आरोपणविशेषो[^९१] ऽग्न्यादौ । अतो यज्ञशब्देनात्र होमस्याभिधानम् । होमे ह्य् एते कालाः श्रुताव् आम्नाताः, न यागमात्रे । 


[^९१]:
     DK (5: 115): prakṣepaḥ adhikaraṇaviśeṣe


[^९०]:
     M G 1st ed.: yaṣṭavyasya; G 2nd ed.: yad dravyasya; DK (5: 115) places dravyasya after home

- उदितादिशब्दैश् च "उदिते होतव्यम्" इत्यादिका श्रुतिर् एकदेशेन लक्ष्यते । येयम् "उदिते होतव्यम्, नोदिते होतव्यम्" इति श्रुतिः सैवंपरेत्य् एवं योजना ।

- **समयाध्युषित**शब्देन समुदायेनैवोषसः[^९२] काल उच्यते ।


[^९२]:
     M G: -auṣasaḥ

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु पदद्वयम् एतद् इत्य् आहुः । समयशब्दः समीपवचनः समीपिनम् अपेक्षते । उदितानुदितयोः संनिधानात् तत्समीपी संध्याकालः । अध्युषितं रात्रेर् विवासकालः । व्युष्टायां रात्राव् इत्य् अर्थः । कासुचिच् छ्रुतिष्व् एवं पठितम्, कासुचिद् एवम् इति श्रुतिवाक्यानुकरणम् एषा स्मृतिः, तत्र किं पदद्वयम् एतद् उतैकम् इति तत एव निर्णयः । 

- अतो विकल्पेनैकं होमाख्यं कर्म प्रति कालत्रयविधानान्[^९३] नास्ति विरोधः । सिद्धरूपे हि वस्तुनीतरेतरविरुद्धरूपसमावेशासंभवात् स्याद् विरोधः, न साध्ये[^९४] । साध्यं ह्य् अनेनापि सिध्यत्य् अनेनापित्य् अवगम्यते । तत्र कुतो विरोधः ।


[^९४]:
     M G 1st ed.: saṃbhavaḥ | tasmād virodho na sādhya |


[^९३]:
     M G 1st ed.: -traye 'pi śrutividhānān

- एष एव च स्मृतीनां विरुद्धानां विकल्पो न्याय्यः ॥ २.१५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is an instance of the ‘conflict’ spoken of in the preceding verse.

In regard to the offering of the Agnihotra-lilbtions, all these three
points of time have been prescribed,—and the injunction of each of these
deprecates the others; and the sense of these Vedic texts is that ‘*the
merificial act may be performed at any time*’;—in all ways the offering
proceeds, *i.e*., it should proceed. As regards the deprecation of the
offering done *after sunrise* (which is found in the text enjoining the
time before sunrise), this deprecation is not meant to be an interdict;
it is only meant to be an injunction of the offering *before sunrise*.
Similarly in the other cases. Thus what is meant is that the act may be
performed at any one of the three points of time; and the command of the
scriptures becomes fulfilled by the offering being done at any one time.

‘*Such is the pronouncement of the Veda*.’—This is what is meant by the
Vedic declaration; and it does not mean that what is deprecated is
interdicted.

The ‘*sacrificial act*’ spoken of here is what is known as the
‘*Agnihotra-homa*’; there is not much difference between ‘*yāga*’(a
sacrifice) and ‘*homa*’ (libation-pouring). When one renounces his
proprietary right over a substance in favour of a certain deity,—the
idea in his mind being ‘this belongs to the deity now, and not to
me,’—this is what constitutes ‘*yāga*’ ‘sacrifice’; and exactly the same
is the form of ‘Homa,’ ‘Pouring of libation,’ also. The only difference
is that in *Homa* there is the additional factor of the substance being
*thrown*, deposited in a specified manner, in fire or some such
receptacle. It is in view of this similarity that the *Homa* is spoken
of here as ‘*yajña*.’ That this is so is proved by the fact that the
three points of time spoken of have been prescribed in the Veda in
connection with *Homa*, and not all kinds of sacrifice.

The expressions ‘*udite*’ (‘after sunrise’) and the rest are to be taken
as parts of, and as standing for, such declarations as ‘*udite
hotavyam*’ (‘the Homa should be performed after sunrise’) and so
forth;—the construction being that ‘the meaning of the declaration that
the Homa should be performed after sunrise, not before it, etc., etc.,
is as follows.’

By the compound word ‘*samayā*’ the time of early dawn is meant. Others
have taken it as consisting of two words: ‘*samayā*’ meaning *near*,
requires its correlative in the shape of *something that is near*; and
since the two points of time mentioned in the sentence are those
‘before’ and ‘after sunrise,’ the required correlative in the present
instance is the time of *twilight*. ‘*Adhyuṣita*’ stands for *the time
of departure of the night*, and means ‘at the departure of night.’ \[So
the compound means ‘that twilight which comes after the departure of
night.’\]

The words of the text are intended to quote the words of the Veda, which
are found to be read in one form in one text, and in another form in
another text; so that whether the expression ‘*samayādhyuṣita*’ is one
word or two words can be ascertained only from the original texts.

Thus then, the same act of Homa being laid down in the Veda as to be
done *optionally* at any one of the three points of time, there is no
*inconsistency*. It is only in connection with two accomplished entities
that, when found to be incompatible with one another, they are held to
be ‘inconsistent’; the same cannot be true in connection with things
still to he accomplished \[and all actions belong to this latter
category\]. For what has got to be accomplished may be accomplished
either in one way or another; and how could there be any inconsistency
in this?

In the case of conflicting *Smṛti* -texts also, the most reasonable view
to take is that they lay down optional alternatives.—(15)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Samayādhyuṣite*’;—The dawn (Medhātithi),—or that twilight which comes
after the departure of the night (Ibid, and Govindarāja);—the time when
neither the sun nor the stars are visible (Kullūka).

This verse has been quoted by the *Madanapārijāta* (p. 175) as
indicating the two divisions of the time ‘before sunrise’;—these two
divisions being ‘*Anudita*’ and ‘*Samayādhyuṣita*.’ These two are more
fully described by Kātyāyana, who defines the ‘*anudita*’ as ‘the
sixteenth part of the night, adorned by stars and planets’,—and the
‘*Samayādhyuṣita*’ as that time in the morning when the stars have
disappeared, but the sun has not risen.

The same authority defines the ‘*udita* ‘sunrise,’ as that when the mere
streak of the sun is visible, not all its rays.

It is quoted also in the the *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Ācāra, p. 326);—in the
*Saṃskāraratnamālā*, (p. 2) as laying down the two times for *Homa*, and
it reads ‘*homaḥ*’ for ‘*yajñaḥ*’;—in the *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 65) as
laying down the time for the morning *Homa*;—and in the
*Nityāchārapradīpa* (p. 410.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.1.—‘One should offer libation of cooked food
both morning and evening.’

*Kātyāyana-Smṛti*, 1.9.35.—‘Before the stars are distinctly visible and
before the redness of the sky has disappeared, one should offer the
evening oblation.’

*Muṇḍopaniṣad*, 1.2.1.—‘All those detailed acts that the wise ones have
found mentioned in the Vedas,—all these one should always perform.’

*Muṇḍopaniṣad*, 1.2.3.—‘One who does not perform the Agnihotra, or the
Darśapūrṇamāsa, or the Cāturmāsya, or the Vaisvadeva......destroys his
entire family.’

*Īśopaniṣad*, 2.—‘One should desire to live for a hundred years, all
along doing his duties.’

*Mahānārāyaṇopaniṣad*, 2.1.—‘The Agnihotra should be continued till
death.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

015	(Thus) the (Agnihotra) sacrifice may be (optionally) performed, at any time after the sun has risen, before he has risen, or when neither sun nor stars are visible; that (is declared) by Vedic texts.
</details>
