+++
title = "016 निषेकादि-श्मशानान्तो मन्त्रैर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That person alone, and none other, should be regarded as entitled to the scripture, for whom the sacraments beginning with conception and ending with the crematorium, are prescribed as to be done with mantras.—(16)


“When the Śūdra is not entitled to study the scripture and learn its meaning, how can he be entitled to the performance of the acts therein prescribed? Unless the man knows the exact form of the act, he cannot do it; unless he studies the scriptures, he cannot know what is contained in them; and no unlearned person is entitled to the performance of any (religious) act.”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"विदुषा ब्राह्मणेनेदम् अध्येतव्यम्" (म्ध् १.१०३) इति पठन्ति । स चार्थवादः । तत्र तव्यप्रत्ययदर्शनात् कस्यचिद् विधिभ्रान्तिः स्यात् । तथा च सति क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् अध्ययनं निवर्तत इत्य् एतदाशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थो ऽयं श्लोकः क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः प्राप्तिं दर्शयति । तथा यथाकामी शूद्रो ऽप्य् अप्रतिषेधाद् अध्येतुं प्रवर्तेत तन्निवृत्यर्थम् अपीत्य् एवम् इदं श्लोकं पूर्वे व्याचक्षरे । 

- **शास्त्र**शब्दो ऽयं मानवग्रन्थवचनः । **अधिकारो** मयैतद् अनुष्ठेयम् इत्य् अवगमः । न च शब्दराशेः सिद्धस्वभावस्यानुष्ठेयत्वावगतिः संभवति । न हि द्रव्यम् अनाश्रित्य क्रियाविशेषं साध्यतयावगम्यते । अतः शास्त्रविषयायां कस्यांचित् क्रियायाम् अधिकार इत्य् अवगम्यते । तत्र "कृभ्वस्तयस्" तावन् न विषयतया प्रतीयन्ते । भ्वस्त्योर् भवत्यर्थत्वात् । भ्वस्तिसंबन्धे ह्य् अयम् अर्थः प्रतीयते- "शास्त्रस्य यद् भवनं या च सत्ता ताम् अनुतिष्ठेत्" इति । न चान्यदीयायां सत्तायाम् अन्यस्यानुष्ठातृत्वसंभवः । करोत्यर्थे ऽपि न संभवति, पदानां नित्यत्वाद् वाक्यानां चान्येन कृतत्वात् । अतः शास्त्रसहचारिण्य् अध्ययनक्रिया प्रतीयते । अतो ऽयम् अर्थ उक्तो भवति । शास्त्राध्ययने तस्याधिकारः । यथैवाध्ययने तथैव तदर्थश्रवणे ऽपि[^९५] । 


[^९५]:
     J omit: tadartha-

- <u>ननु</u> आदिमत्त्वान्[^९६] मानवस्य ग्रन्थस्य कथं तद्विषयो विधिर् अनादिवेदमूल इति शक्यते वक्तुम् । <u>उच्यते</u> । यानि कानिचन शास्त्रप्रतिपादकानि वाक्यानि न तानि शूद्रेणाध्येयानीति शक्यते सामान्यतो ऽनुमानम् । यानि वेदवाक्यानि यानि तदर्थव्याख्यानवाक्यानि व्याख्यातॄणां तत्प्रतिरूपकाणि तान्य् अपि प्रवाहनित्यतया नित्यान्य् एव । अनुष्ठानं तु शास्त्रविषयः । तत्र चातुर्वर्णस्याधिकारः । <u>ननु</u> एवं सत्य् अनुपात्तकर्तृविशेषेषु सामान्यधर्मेषु शूद्रस्याधिकारप्रसङ्गः । <u>यथा</u> च[^९७] न भवति तथा च[^९८] तत्र तत्र कथयिष्यामः ।


[^९८]:
     J omit: ca


[^९७]:
     J omit: ca


[^९६]:
     M G 1st ed.: na cādi-

- <u>ननु</u> कथम् अध्ययनावबोधाधिकारनिषेधे कर्माधिकारः । न ह्य् अविदितकर्मरूपस्य तदनुष्ठानसंभवः, न चाध्ययनम् अन्तरेण तदर्थावबोधसंभवः, न चावैद्यो ऽधिक्रियते । <u>सत्यम्</u> । परोपदेशाद् अपि यावत् तावत् सिद्ध्यति परिज्ञानम् । यं ब्राह्मणम् आश्रितः शूद्रो यो वार्थतः प्रवृत्तः स एनं शिक्षयिष्यतीदं कृत्वेदं कुर्व् इति । अतो न कर्मानुष्ठानप्रयुक्ते शूद्रस्याध्ययनवेदने, स्त्रीवत् परप्रत्ययाद् अप्य् अनुष्ठानसिद्धेः । यथा स्त्रीणां भर्तृविद्यैव प्रसङ्गाद् उपकरोति न कर्मश्रुतयो विद्यां प्रयुञ्जते । तेषाम् एव स्वप्रत्ययो ऽनुष्ठानहेतुर् येषां "स्वाध्यायो ऽध्येतव्यः" इति विधिर् अस्ति पुंसाम् । स च पुंसां त्रैवर्णिकानाम् । तेषाम् अपि नार्थज्ञानप्रयुक्ते ऽध्ययनवेदने, अपि तु विधिद्वयप्रयुक्ते आचार्यकरणविधिना स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविधिना[^९९] च ।


[^९९]:
     M G: -dhyayanaṃ vidhinā

- निषेको गर्भाधानम्, स आदिर् यस्य संस्कारकलापस्य स **निषेकादिः** । गर्भाधानं च विवाहाद् अनन्तरं प्रथमोपगमे "विष्णुर् योनिं कल्पयतु" (र्व् १०.१८४.१)  इति मन्त्रवत् केषांचिद् विहितम् । परेषाम् आ गर्भग्रहणात् प्रत्यृतु । श्मशानम् अन्तो ऽस्येति **श्मशानान्तः** । श्मशानशब्देन मृतश्रीराणि यत्र निधीयन्ते तत् स्थानम् उच्यते । तच् च साहचर्यात् प्रेतसंस्कारं पराचीम् इष्टिं लक्षयति । सा हि मन्त्रवती, न स्थानम् । अनेन च द्विजातयो लक्ष्यन्ते । तेषां हि मन्त्रवन्तः संस्काराः । द्विजातीनाम् इति नोक्तम् । विचित्रा श्लोकानां कृतिः स्वायंभुवस्यास्य मनोः ।

- **मन्त्रैर् उदित** उक्तो **विधिर्** इति नायं संबन्धः । न हि मन्त्रा विधिं वदन्ति । किं तर्हि, प्रयोगावस्थस्य विधेयस्य स्मारकाः, न विधायकाः । तस्माद् एवं व्याख्येयम् । मन्त्रैर् युक्तः समन्त्रको येषाम् अयम् विधिर् इति । 

- **नान्यस्य कस्यचिद्** इत्य् अनुवादः, द्विजातीनां नियतत्वात् । अथ वा कश्चिन् मन्येत द्विजातीनाम् अयं विहितो ऽवश्यकर्तव्यः । शूद्राणां त्व् अशिष्टो ऽप्रतिषिद्ध इति । तदाशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् उक्तम् ॥ २.१६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In Adhyāya I (Verse 103) are found the words ‘this should be studied by
the learned Brāhmaṇa’; and though this is a mere *Arthavāda*, yet the
presence of the potential affix ‘*tavya*’ (in the term ‘*adhyetavyam*’)
might lead people into the mistake that it is an Injunction; and in that
case the Kṣatriya and Vaiśya would be precluded from the study. It is
with a view to preclude this possibility that we have the present verse,
which shows the capability of the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya* also to
study.

The older commentators have also taken this verse as serving to preclude
the possibility of the Śūdra studying the scripture, which he might be
tempted to do.

The term ‘*scripture*’ here stands for the compilation by Manu.

‘*Entitled*,’—the ‘title’ meant here consists in the idea that ‘this
should be done by me.’ But no ‘collection of words’—which is an
accomplished entity—can be regarded as ‘to be done’; nor, on the other
band, can any action be regarded as ‘to be accomplished,’ except as
related to a certain substance. Hence the ‘*title*’ is understood to
pertain to a certain action relating to the scripture. Now in the
present context, the action intended is not found to be either *making*,
or *being*, or *existing*; as for ‘being’ and ‘existing,’ they both mean
‘to be’; so that if these were the action meant, the meaning would
be—‘one should undertake the *being* or the *existing*, as related to
the scripture’; but as a matter of fact the ‘being’ of one thing cannot
be undertaken by another. The action of ‘making’ also would not be
applicable; because so far as the *words* are concerned, all are eternal
(and as such cannot be *made*); while as regards *sentences*, they have
been already *made* by another person (the author of the scripture).
From all this it follows that the action intended is that of *studying*
as pertaining to the scripture. So that the meaning comes to be
this—‘the man is entitled to the study of the scripture’; and just as to
the studying, so also to the learning of its meaning.

“In as much as the work of Manu has had a beginning in time, how could
any injunction relating to it (as the present verse is supposed to be)
be based upon the Veda, which is beginningless?”

Our answer is as follows:—It is quite open to us to infer some such
general (Vedic) injunction as that ‘the Śūdra should not study such
sentences as serve to expound the scriptures.’ Further, these statements
of the expounders of the Veda that serve to explain Vedic texts bear a
certain resemblance to these texts; and hence they are as much the
subject of a bcginningless tradition as the Vedic texts themselves.

What forms the subject-matter of the scriptures is actual *performance*,
and to this all the four castes arc entitled \[though to the *study* of
the scriptures the three twice-born castes alone are entitled\].

“If such be the case, then it would be permissible for the *Śūdra* to
perform all those acts which are prescribed in a general manner, without
reference to any specified persons.”

How this contingency does, not arise we shall show, as occasion arises.

*Objection*:—

> “When the *Śūdra* is not entitled to study the scripture and learn its
> meaning, how can he be entitled to the performance of the acts therein
> prescribed? Unless the man knows the exact form of the act, he cannot
> do it; unless he studies the scriptures, he cannot know what is
> contained in them; and no unlearned person is entitled to the
> performance of any (religious) act.”

True; but the requisite knowledge can be obtained from the advice of
other persons. The *Śūdra* may be dependent upon a Brāhmaṇa; or a
Brāhmaṇa may be doing the work of instructing people for payment; and
such a Brāhmaṇa might very well instruct the Śūdra to ‘do this, after
having done that’ and so forth. So that the mere fact of the Śūdra
performing the acts does not necessarily indicate that he is entitled to
the study and understanding of the scriptures; as performance can be
accomplished, even on the strength of what is learnt from others; as is
done in the case of women; what helps women (in the performance of their
duties) is the learning of their husbands, which becomes available to
them through companionship. Then again, the texts laying down the acts
do not imply the direct knowledge (of the injunctive texts). It is only
in the case of men, to whom is addressed the injunction of Vedic
study—contained in the words ‘one should study the Veda’—that the
performance of duties proceeds upon the basis of their own learning; and
this injunction is meant only for the *male* member’s of the three
higher castes. But in the case of these also their study and
understanding of the scriptures is not prompted by their knowledge of
what is contained in them; it is prompted entirely by the two
injunctions—(1) the injunction of having recourse to a duly qualified
teacher, and (2) the injunction of Vedic study.

‘Conception,’ is ‘ impregnation ’; that series of sacraments which
begins with this is called ‘*niṣēkādiḥ*,’ ‘*beyinning conception*.’ This
sacrament is laid down as to be performed after the marriage (of the
parents),—with the *mantra* ‘*viṣṇuryoniṅkalpayatu*,’ etc. (*Ṛgveda*,
10.18.1.1)—on the occasion of the first intercourse only, for some
people, while for others at each menstrual period, till conception takes
place.

That which has the ‘*crematorium*’ for its end is called ‘*ending with
the crematorium*.’ The word ‘crematorium’ stands for that place where
dead bodies are disposed of; and through association it indicates the
rites performed for the dead, called the ‘*Antyeṣṭi*’; as it is only
this performance that is done with *mantras*, and not the *place* (which
is what is directly denoted by the word ‘crematorium’).

The qualification mentioned in the text points to the Twice-born castes;
it is only these persons who have their sacraments done with *mantras*.
The author does not say simply ‘*dvijātīnām*,’ ‘for the twicc-born’ (and
he has taken to the round-about way of saying the same thing), because
Manu Svāyambhuva has a peculiar style of composing his verses.

The passage is not to be construed to mean that ‘the sacraments are laid
down *in mantras*’; because *mantras* do not contain the injunction of
any acts; they are not injunctive; they only serve as *reminders*,
during the performance of the act, of the details enjoined in other
texts. Hence the passage should be explained as meaning—‘those for whom
the sacraments are laid down as to be done with Mantras.’

‘*None other*,’—is purely explanatory; the rest of the sentence having
already served the purpose of restricting what is said to the twice-born
castes. Or, it may be taken as reiterated for the preventing of the idea
that some one might entertain the notion that ‘what is laid down here is
something that *must* be done by the twice-born castes, while for the
*Śūdra* it is neither prescribed nor interdicted.’—(16)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Mantraiḥ*’—This has been added with a view to exclude the woman and
the Śūdra, whose sacraments are not performed ‘with mantras’ (see 2.66
and 10.127).

Burnell remarks—‘In Vedic times the reception of outsiders into the
community was, to a certain extent, recognised, and ceremonies (*e*.
*g*. the *Vrātyastoma*) were in use for this purpose.’

It is rather difficult to be very dogmatic regarding what was, or what
was not, recognised ‘in Vedic times.’ But if the ceremony of the
*Vrātyaṣtoma* is the sole authority for the statement, then it has to be
borne in mind that the writer has not comprehended the purpose of those
ceremonies. If he had taken the trouble to find out what ‘*vrātya*’
meant, he would have found out that the ceremony was performed for the
*re-admission* of those who had become excluded by reason of the
omission of certain obligatary rites; and it was not meant for admitting
absolute ‘outsiders’.

This verse has been quoted by the Mitākṣarā on 1.3 (p. 6)—in support of
the view that it is the Twice-born persons alone who are entitled to
study the *Dharma Śāstra*.

It is quoted also in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 512) to the same
effect—also in the Aparārka (p. 14);—in the *Smṛticandrikā* (p. 18.)
which explains ‘*Niṣeka* as the *Garbhādhāna* sacrament and ‘*smaśāna*’
as the ‘after-death rites;—and in the *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 574) as
implying that the rites are to be performed for the *Śūdra* also, but
without Vedic Mantras.

*Medhātithi* (p. 73, 1. 26)—*Ācāryakoraṇavidhinā
svādyāyādhyayanavidhināca*.’ Here both the *Bhāṭṭa* and the *Prābhākara*
views of *Śāstrārambha* are accepted by the writer.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

016	Know that he for whom (the performance of) the ceremonies beginning with the rite of impregnation (Garbhadhana) and ending with the funeral rite (Antyeshti) is prescribed, while sacred formulas are being recited, is entitled (to study) these Institutes, but no other man whatsoever.
</details>
