+++
title = "018 तस्मिन् देशे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That practice, which has comb down through an unbroken line op tradition among the several castes and subcastes in that country, is called the ‘Practice of Good Men.’—(18)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>अथास्मिन्</u> देशे य आचारस् तस्य प्रामाण्ये किं विद्वत्ता शिष्टता चोपाधिर् अङ्गीक्रियते । अथाविदुषाम् अशिष्टानां च देशोपाधिर् एव प्रमाणम् । किं चातः । यदि नापेक्ष्यते, यत् तद् उक्तम् "आचारश् चैव साधूनाम्"(म्ध् २.६) इति विशेषणद्वयम् अनर्थकम् । न त्व् असाध्वाचारस्य धर्ममूलतोपपद्यते, वेदसंयोगासंभवात् । अथापेक्ष्यते, देशविशेषसंबन्धानुपकारः । न हि देशान्तरे ऽपि शिष्टसमाचारस्याप्रामाण्यं शक्यते वक्तुम् । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । प्रायिकम् एतद् अभिधानम् । प्रायोवृत्त्यासमिन् देशे शिष्टानां संभव इत्य् उक्तम्- **तस्मिन् देशे य आचारः स सदाचार** इति ।

- <u>अन्ये तु</u>, देशान्तरे मातुलदुहितुः परिणयनाद् देशाचारनिषेधार्थम् इदम् इत्य् आहुः ।

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । अविशेषेणैवोक्तम्-

- तद् देशकुलजातीनाम् अविरुद्धं प्रकल्पयेत् । (म्ध् ८.४६)

स च विरुद्धः "ऊर्ध्वं सप्तमात् पितृबन्धुभ्यः । । । मातृबन्धुभ्यश् च पञ्चमात्" (ग्ध् ४.३, ५) इत्य् एतेन । अस्मिन्न् अपि देशे ऽनुपनीतेन सह भोजनादिर् आचारो नैव धर्मत्वेनेष्यते । न च स्मृतिविरुद्धस्याचारस्य प्रामाण्यसंभवः, श्रुतिविप्रकर्षात् । आचारात् स्मृतिर् अनुमातव्या, स्मृतेः श्रुतिः । स्मृतिस् त्व् अव्यवहिताम् एव श्रुतिम् अनुमापयति । किं च कारणग्रहाच् चैवमादेर् आचारस्य । रूपवतीं मातुलकन्यां कामयमाना राजभयाद् ऊढवन्तः, कन्यागमनं[^१००] दण्डो मा भूद् इति । 


[^१००]:
     DK (5: 117) suggests: kanyāgamane

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् अविद्वांसः "येनास्य पितरो याताः" (म्ध् ४.१७८) इत्य् अस्य यथाश्रुतम् अर्थं गृहीत्वा धर्मो ऽयम् इति प्रतिपन्नाः । अपि च[^१०१] "एतास् तिस्रस् तु भार्यार्थे नोपयच्छेत" (म्ध् ११.१७३) इति प्रायश्चित्तं श्रुतम् अपि, भ्रान्तिहेतुः "आभ्यस् तिसृभ्यो ऽन्या न प्रतिषिद्धा" इति । यथा चास्य नायम् अर्थस् तथा वक्ष्यामः ।


[^१०१]:
     DK (5: 117) suggests: yathā ca

- न च दृष्टकारणयोः स्मृत्याचारयोः प्रामाण्यम् । उक्तं भट्टपादैः- 

- विरुद्धा च विगीता च दृष्टार्था दृष्टकारणा ।

- स्मृतिर् न श्रुतिमूला स्याद् या चैषा संभवश्रुतिः ॥[^१०२]

तस्मात् "एतान् द्विजातयो देशान् संश्रयेरन्" (म्ध् २.२४) इत्य् एतद्विधिशेषा देशप्रशंसार्थवादा एते । 

- परंपरैव **पारंपर्यम्** । अन्यस्माद् अन्यम् उपसंक्रामति, तस्माद् अन्यम्, ततो ऽप्य् अन्यम् इत्य् एवंरूपः प्रवाहः परंपरा । **क्रमः** तदविच्छेदः, तत **आगतः** संप्राप्तः । संकीर्णयोनयः **अन्तरालाः** । तत्सहितानां **वर्णानाम्** ॥ २.१८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Question*—“As regards the *usage* in the said country, what is the
condition of its reliability? Is it *learning* and *culture*? Or the
connection of the particular country is the only condition, and the
practices of the ignorant and the uncultured also arc authoritative? We
ask this because if ‘learning’ and ‘culture’ are not regarded as
necessary conditions, then the two qualifications mentioned in the sixth
verse—in the phrase ‘the Practice of good and learned men’—become
futile. And further, it is not possible for the ‘Practice of Bad men’ to
be a *source of Dharma*, for the simple reason that such persons can
have nothing to do with the Veda. If, on the other hand, *learning* and
*culture* do form the conditions of reliability, then no useful purpose
will have been served by the counection of the particular country herein
mentioned; because it cannot be said that practice of learned and
cultured men of other countries is not authoritative.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The statement is based upon
probability; the chances are that in the country mentioned only learned
and cultured men are born. This is what is meant by the assertion that
‘*the Practice in that country is called the Practice of good*.’

Others have explained that the verse is intended to deny the authority
of a purely local ‘Practice’ (Usage), on the ground that in other
countries people marry the daughter of the maternal uncle.

This explanation is not right. Because it has been laid down as a
general principle that ‘from among the practices of the country, the
family and the caste, only that should be done what is not contrary to
law’; and the marrying of one’s maternal cousin is actually contrary to
the law, as found in the injunction that ‘one should marry beyond the
seventh grade of relationship on the father’s side and beyond the fifth
on the mother’s’ \[and the maternal cousin falls within these prohibited
degrees\] Further, as regards the said country of Brahmāvarta also there
are certain practices—such as eating in the same dish with boys who have
not undergone the Brahmanical Initiation—which are not regarded as
authoritative. In fact no practice can ever be authoritative which is
contrary to *Smṛti*; because it would be so much further removed from
the Veda (the source of all authority); as the Practice leads to the
inference of the *Smṛti*, and the *Smṛti* leads to the inference of the
Veda; while the *Smṛti* leads to the inference of its corroborative Veda
directly. There is another reason why Practices like the one mentioned
above can never be even suspected to be authoritative. Such Practices
are found to be clearly due to perceptible motives: *e.g*., some one
having fallen in love with a handsome maternal cousin married her,
through fear of the King, in order to escape from the penalty that would
be inflicted for violating the chastity of an unmarried girl; and others
who came after him being themselves illiterate and relying upon the
words ‘one should go on on the same path on which his father and
grand-father have gone’ (*Manu*, 4.178), taken in their literal sense,
came to regard the said marrying as ‘*Dharma*’ (something *that should
he done*). Then again, even though the text (4.172) prescribes an
expiatory rite in connection with the taking as wife of the three
classes of girls (the daughter of the Father’s sister, the daughter of
the Mother’s sister and the daughter of the Mother’s brother),—yet
people are liable to fall into the mistake that marriage with relatives
other than the three specified here is not interdicted. That such is not
the meaning of the verse (11.172) wo shall explain later on.

Now no *Smṛti* or *Practice*, that is prompted by a perceptible motive,
can ever be regarded as authoritative. Says the revered Bhatta
(Kumārila)—‘That *Smṛti*, which is contrary to the Veda, or deprecated,
and which serves a visible purpose, and is prompted by perceptible
motives, can never he based upon the Veda.’

From all this it follows that what is contained in this verse is only an
*arthavāda*, eulogising the particular country,—this eulogy being
supplementary to the Injunction coming later on that ‘the Twice-born
people should betake themselves to these countries’ (verse 21 below).

‘*Pāramparya*’ is the same as ‘*paramparā*,’ ‘Tradition’; which goes
from one to the other, from him again to a fourth person, and so on;
this succession is what is called ‘*Tradition*’; and ‘*Krama*,’
‘*line*,’ stands for ‘unbroken continuity;’—‘*come down*’ means
*learnt*.

‘*Sub-castes*’—are people of mixed birth;—the ‘castes’ along with these
are called *Sāntarālāḥ*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 75, 1. 5)—*Kāraṇagrahaṇāt*.’—When a *custom* or even a
Smṛti rule, is found to be actually based upon some material motive,—no
authority can attach to such custom or rule. Read in this connection
Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 1. 3. 4, which discusses the authoritative character of
such *Smṛti* rules as, while not contradicting any Śruti-rule, are yet
found to be due to ignorance or covetousness; *e.g*. the text laying
down that the cloth with which the sacrificial post is covered should be
given to the priest. The conclusion on this point is that such rules
have no authority. (See, for further details, Prābhākara—Mīmāṃsā, pp.
138-139).

This verse is quoted in the Madanapārijāta (p. 12);—in the *Dānamayūkha*
(p. 7);—in the *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 4),—and in the
Vīramitrodaya—Paribhāṣa (p. 55), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Paramparya*;’ is the same as ‘*paramparā*’, ‘Tradition,’—*i.
e*., that whose beginning cannot be traced;—this precludes the authority
of *modern* customs;—‘*antarāla*’ are the mixed castes;—it quotes
Medhātithi to the effect that the purport of this verse is to eulogise
the custom of the particular country, and not to deny the authority of
the customs of other countries.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 18-23)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 1.7-12.—‘Aryāvarta is the country which is to the East of
the *spot of* disappearance, to the West of Kālakavana, to the North of
Pāriyātra and the Vindhya and to the South of the Himālaya. The Dharma
and practices prevalent in this country should be accepted in all
places. Some people apply the name *Āryāvarta* to the land between the
Gaṅgā and the Yamunā. Brahmanic glory is coterminous with the tract over
which the black antelope roams.

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 15.9-14.—‘The Dharmas and Ācāras prevalent in that country
should be accepted everywhere. The others are of contrary Dharma. Some
people restrict Dharma to the country lying between the Gaṅgā and the
Yamunā. Others again state that Brahmanic glory extends all over that
tract of land over which the black deer roams. The limits of this tract
are hounded on the west by the river Sindhu and on other sides by the
Vaitariṇī river (in Mālwā, according to Vīramitrodaya, Paribhāṣa, p.
57); and by the spot where the sun rises.’ *Vyāsa*, 1.3.—‘The Vedic
dharma can prevail only in that country over which the black deer roams
naturally.’

*Samvarta*, 4.—‘That country where the black deer constantly roams at
will is to be known as *Dharma-deśa*, where alone the duties of the
twice-born can be performed.’

*Baudhāyana*, 1.25.25.—‘To the East of the spot of disappearance (of the
Sarasvatī river), to the West of the Kālakavana, to the North of
Pāriyātra and to the South of Himālaya,—this is Āryāvarta; it is the
*Sadāchāra* of this country that is authoritative; according to some
people it is the tract included between the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīra-Pari.,p. 57).—‘That country is noble which lies
to the East of the mountain where the Sun sets, to the West of that
where the Sun rises, which is interspersed with high mountains and
sacred rivers; this is the *sacred land*; or the land where the black
antelope roams, or that to the East of the Sindhu and the Sauvīra, to
the West of Kāmpilya, to the North of the Pāriyātra and to the South of
the Himalaya,—here Brahmanic glory is complete.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (*ibid*).—‘From Himālaya to the Kumārī (Cape Comorin), from
the Sindhu and the Vaitariṇī and to the place where the sun rises, or
where the black antelope roams,—over this land alone is Dharma present
in its complete form.’

*Viṣṇu*, 74.4.—‘That country where there is no differentiation of the
four castes should be known as the *mleccha deśa*; other than this is
Āryāvarta.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

018	The custom handed down in regular succession (since time immemorial) among the (four chief) castes (varna) and the mixed (races) of that country, is called the conduct of virtuous men.
</details>
