+++
title = "023 कृष्णसारस् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But the region where the spotted deer roams by nature is to be known as the ‘land fit for sacrificial acts’; beyond that is the ‘land op the Mlecchas.’ (23)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कृष्णश्वेतः कृष्णपीतो वा कृष्णसारङ्गो[^१०७] **मृगो यत्र चरति** निवसति । संभव उत्पत्तिर् यत्र देशे तस्य **स्व्भावतः,** न पुनर् देशान्तरात् प्राशस्त्योपायनादिना निमित्तेनानीतस्य कियन्तम् अपि कालं निवासः । **स देशो यज्ञियो** यागार्हो बोद्धव्यः । अतः कृष्णमृगचरणात् परो ऽन्यो **म्लेच्छदेशः** । म्लेच्छाः प्रसिद्धाः । चातुर्वर्ण्यजात्यपेताः प्रतिलोमजातीया अनधिकृता[^१०८] मेदान्ध्रशबरपुलिन्दादयः । 


[^१०८]:
     M G J: pratilomajātīyānadhikṛtā


[^१०७]:
     J: kṛṣṇasārākhyo

- न चानेन यागाधिकरणतास्य देशस्य विधीयते, "समे यजेत" इतिवत्, चरतीति वर्तमाननिर्देशात् । न हि यत्रैव चरितुं प्रवृत्तस् तदैव तत्र यागः शक्यः कर्तुम् । यागस्य हि देशो ऽधिकरणम्, तत्साधनकर्त्रादिकारकाश्रितद्रवादिधारणद्वारेण । न च द्वयोर् मूर्त्तयोर् एककाले एकदेशे स्थनसंभवः । न च कालान्तरलक्षणा न्याय्या, विधौ लक्षणाया अन्याय्यत्वात् । यथोकं शूर्पाधिकरणे- "एतद् धि क्रियत इत्य् उच्यते" (शब् १.२.२६) इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> च नाभिव्यापक एवाधेयः, येन कृत्स्नाधाराभिव्याप्त्यैवाधिकरणार्थनिर्वृत्तिः स्यात्, "तिलेषु तैलम्" (श्वेउ १.१५) इतिवत् । किं तर्हि, एकदेशसंबन्धिनाप्य् आधेयेन भवति कृत्स्नस्याधारभावः, "प्रासाद आस्ते", "रथं अधितिष्ठति" इति (च्ड़्। पाण् १.४.४५) । एवम् हि ग्रामनगरसमुदायस्य नदीपर्वतान्ताद्यवधिकस्य देशस्य प्रकृतत्वाद् एकदेशे ऽपि पर्वतारण्यादौ चरन् सर्वम् आधारीकरोति । तेनायम् अदोषः मूर्तयोर् नैकदेशः संभवति । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । नैवात्र यष्टव्यम् इति विधिर् अस्ति । जानातेः परो विधायकः[^१०९] श्रुतः, न यजेः । यागस्य तत्रार्हता श्रुता, यागार्हो ऽसौ देश इति । सा च यागार्हतासत्य्[^११०] अपि विधौ घटते । एतेषु देशेषु यागाङ्गानि दर्भपलाशखदिरादीनि प्रायेण च भवन्ति । अधिकारिणश् च त्रैवर्णिका त्रैविद्याश्[^१११] च तेष्व् एव देशेषु दृश्यन्ते । अत एतदवलम्बनो यागार्हतानुवादः । कृत्यो ऽपि "ज्ञेयः" इत्य् अध्यारोपितविध्यर्थः "जर्तिलयवाग्वा जुहुयाद्" (सेए मुरोय) इतिवद् विधिवन् निगदार्थवाद एव ।


[^१११]:
     M G 1st ed.: vaidyāś; G 2nd ed.: traividyavaidyāś


[^११०]:
     M G: yāgārhatā saty


[^१०९]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vidhāyaka

- यच् चोक्तम् **म्लेच्छदेशस् त्व् अतः परः** इत्य् एषो ऽपि प्रायिको ऽनुवाद एव । प्रायेण ह्य् एषु देशेषु म्लेच्छा भवन्ति । न त्व् अनेन देशसंबन्धेन म्लेच्छा लक्ष्यन्ते,[^११२] स्वतस् तेषां प्रसिद्धेर् ब्राह्मणादिजातिवत् । अथार्थद्वारेणायं शब्दः प्रवृत्तो म्लेच्छानां देश इति । तत्र यदि कथंचिद् ब्रह्मावर्तादिदेशम् अपि म्लेच्छा आक्रमेयुः, तत्रैवावस्थानं कुर्युः, भवेद् एवासौ म्लेच्छदेशः । तथा यदि कश्चित् क्षत्रियादिजातीयो राजा साध्वाचरणो म्लेच्छान् पराजयेत्, चातुर्वर्ण्यं वासयेत्, म्लेच्छांश् चार्यावर्त इव चाण्डालान् व्यवस्थापयेत्, सो ऽपि स्याद् यज्ञियः । यतो न भूमिः स्वतो दुष्टा, संसर्गाद् धि सा दुष्यत्य् अमेध्योपहतेव । अत उक्तदेशव्यतिरेकेणापि सति सामग्र्ये त्रैवर्णिकेनाकृष्णमृगचरणे ऽपि देशे यष्टव्यम् एव । तस्माद् अनुवादो ऽयम् **स ज्ञेयो यज्ञियो देशो म्लेच्छदेशस् त्व् अतः परः** इत्य् उत्तरविधिशेषः ॥ २.२३ ॥


[^११२]:
     M G: vakṣyante
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Where the deer known as ‘*Kṛṣṇasāra*’—that which is either black with
white spots, or black with yellow spots—‘*roams*,’—lives—*i.e*., is
found, born, —‘*by nature*,’—*i.e*., not that where it resides for a
time only, having been imported as a present of rare value, and so
forth;—‘*that country is to be known*’—regarded—‘as *yajñīya*’—‘*fit for
sacrificial acts*.’

‘*Beyond that*’—*i.e*., the region other than the one where the
*Kṛṣṇasāra* is indigenous—‘*is the land of the Mlecchas*.’ The
*Mlecchas* are the people who are known as lying beyond the pale of the
four castes,—not included even among the *Pratiloma* castes; such as the
*Medas*, the *Andhras*, the *Śabaras* and the *Pulindas*.

It is not meant that the sacrifices are to be performed on the very spot
where the deer roams,—in the way in which they are performed ‘on level
ground,’ according to the injunction that ‘one should perform sacrifices
on level ground’; as we h ave ‘rooms’ in the present tense, and
certainly one could not perform a sacrifice on the very spot, and at the
very time, at which the deer may have started to roam. Further, a
certain place is the ‘locus’ of the sacrifice only in the sense that it
holds a all those things that are operative towards its performance,
either as instruments or agents and the like, and certainly two material
substances (*i.e*., the Roaming Deer and the Sacrificial Accessories)
could never occupy the same spot. Nor can the condition mentioned (the
roaming of the deer) be taken as indirectly indicating some, other time
(than the one at which the *roaming* is being done); as no such indirect
indication is admissible in the case of Injunctions; as has been shown
under the *Adhikaraṇa* dealing with the ‘winnowing basket’
(*Mīmāmsā-Sūtra*, 1.2.26 *el. Seq*.), by Śabara (on 1.2.26), who
says—‘what is meant by *is done* is that *it is capable of being done*’
\[and the *present time* is not what is meant to be emphasised\].

“As a matter of fact, when one thing is spoken of as *located*
(contained) in another, it does not mean that it occupies the whole of
it; so that it is not necessary for the *Locus* to be occupied in its
entirety, as it is in the case of the oil contained in the
seasamum-seed. In fact, even when only a portion of one tiling is
occupied by another, the whole of the former becomes its *locus* or
*container; e.g*. when a man is spoken of as ‘sitting *in the house*,’
or ‘occupying the chariot.’ So that in the case in question what is
described here is the entire country, consisting of villages and towns,
and bounded by hills and rivers; and when the deer roams even in some
part of it, the whole country becomes its *locus*. Hence there is no
force in the argument that ‘two material substances cannot occupy the
same spot.’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In the present instance there is
no direct injunction, such as ‘one should perform sacrifices here (in
this country)’; as the injunctive affix is found added to the root ‘to
know’ (in the word ‘*jñeyaḥ*’), and not to the root ‘to sacrifice.’ All
that is meant is that the country spoken of is ‘fit for sacrifices’; the
meaning being that ‘this country is fit for sacrificial performances’;
and this ‘fitness for sacrifices’ is possible even without a direct
injunction (of the actual performance). The fact of the matter is that
it is only in the countries mentioned that the several sacrificial
accessories, in the shape of the *kuśa* -grass, the *Palāśa*, the
*Khadira* and other trees, are mostly found; and sacrificial performers
also, in the shape of persons belonging to the three higher castes and
learned in the three Vedas, are found only in these countries; and it is
on the basis of these facts that the countries have been described as
‘fit for sacrifices.’ The verb ‘*jñeyah*’ ending in the verbal affix
(‘*yat*’) also has the sense of the injunctive only imposed upon it, and
in reality it is only an *Arthavāda* resembling an injunction; just like
the passage ‘*jartilayavāgvā vā juhuyāt*,’ (‘one should offer either the
wild seasamum or the wild wheat’) \[which, even though cotaining the
injunctive word ‘*juhuyāt*,’ has been regarded as an *Arthavāda*
resembling an injunction\],

When again it is said that ‘*beyond this is the land the mlecchas*,’
this also is purely descriptive of the usual state of things; the sense
being that in these other lands it is mostly *mlecchas* that are born;
it does not mean that people inhabiting them are all (on that account)
‘*mlecchas*’; because what is a ‘*mleccha*’ is well known, just like the
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ and other well known castes. In fact, the name
‘*mlecchadeśa*’ is to be taken literally, in the sense that it is ‘the
country of mlecchas’; so that if mlecchas happen to conquer a part of
Āryāvarta itself and take their habitation there, that also would become
‘*mlecchadeśa*.’ Similarly if a certain well-behaved king of the
Kṣatriya-caste should happen to defeat the *mlecchas* and make that land
inhabited by people of the four castes, relegating the indigenous,
*mlecchas* to the category of ‘*Chāṇḍāla*,’ as they are in *Āryāvarta*,
then that which was a ‘country of the mlecchas’ would become a ‘land fit
for sacrifices.’ And this for the simple reason that no laud is by
itself defective; it is only by association that it becomes defective,
just as it is when soiled by impure things. Hence, even apart from the
countries designated here as ‘fit for sacrifices,’ if, in a certain
place, all the necessary conditions are available, one should perform
his sacrifices, even though it be a place where the spotted deer does
not roam.

From all this it follows that the statement—‘*this should, be known as
the country fit for sacrifices, and beyond is the land of the mlecchas*’
is purely descriptive, being meant to be supplementary to the injunction
that follows in the next verse.—(23).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṛṣṇaṣāraḥ*—Burnell—“What animal is intended it is impossible to say.
In Southern India, a pretty little, but rare, gazelle is taken for it.
It does not however answer to the name so far as its colour (light
brown) goes.”

From the explanation given by Medhātithi the deer meant is that which is
‘black with white spots’, or ‘black with yellow spots’; and there is no
doubt that the animal meant is that which is black in the upper, and
white (or yellow) in the lower parts of its body.

*Medhātithi* (p. 76, 1. 26)—‘*Śūrpādhikaraṇe*’—in Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 1-2-26;
and the next sentence ‘*etaddhi kriyate ityucyate*’ is from Śabara on
that Sūtra,—the whole sentence being—‘*etat* (*i. e. shakyate
kartumiti*) *hi kriyate ityucyate, na ca vartamānakālaḥ kaschidasti
yasyāyam pratinirdeṣhaḥ*.’

‘*Mleccadeśastvataḥparaḥ*’—Note the liberalised interpretation of this
provided by Medhātithi. Burnell curiously enough regards this to be an
‘order to dwell in this land’. There is no ‘order’ to dwell in the
Mleccadeśa. The countries to be inhabited having been defined and all
beyond these being designated as ‘Mlechadeśa’, the term ‘these
countries’ of verse 24 refers, as Medhātithi clearly points out, to
Brahmāvarta, Madhyadeśa, Brahmarṣideśa and Yajñīyadeśa; and the order to
dwell contained in verse 24 also refers to those, and not to the
‘Mlecchadeśa’, which is ‘beyond these.’

This verse is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 18), which
adds that the country described as ‘fit for sacrificial performances’ is
meant to be so used only when the aforesaid four countries are not
available;—in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā,p. 56), which explains
‘*Yājñiyaḥ*’ as ‘fit for sacrificial performances’, and ‘*Mlecca*’ as
‘unfit *for sacrificial* performances’;—and in the *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
4).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 18-23)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse 2.18 (The Practice of Good
Men)].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

023	That land where the black antelope naturally roams, one must know to be fit for the performance of sacrifices; (the tract) different from that (is) the country of the Mlekkhas (barbarians).
</details>
