+++
title = "024 एताण् द्विजातयो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-born people should seek to resort to these countries; the Śūdra may however, when distressed for a living, reside in any land.—(24).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यदर्थं देशसंज्ञाभेदकथनं तम् इदानीं विधिम् आह । **एतान्** ब्रह्मावर्तादीन् **देशान्** **द्विजातयो** देशान्तरे ऽपि जाताः **संश्रयेरन्**[^११३] । जन्मदेशं त्यक्त्वा ब्रह्मावर्तादिदेशसंश्रयणं प्रयत्नेन कर्तव्यम् ।


[^११३]:
     M G: jātā āśrayeran

- <u>अत्र केचिद्</u> आहुर् अदृष्टार्थ एवायम् एतद्देशसंश्रयणविधिः । सत्य् अपि देशान्तरे[^११४] ऽधिकारसंभवे एतेषु देशेषु निवासः कर्तव्यः । तत्र कल्प्याधिकारत्वे,[^११५] यदि वा गङ्गादितीर्थस्नानवद् एतद्देशनिवासविधिः पावनत्वेन कल्प्यते । यथैव काश्चिद् आपः पवित्रतरा एवं भूमिभागा अपि केचिद् एव पवित्राः, यथोक्तं पुराणे । यदि वा संश्रयणाद् एव स्वतन्त्रात् स्वर्गो विश्वजिद्वत् ।


[^११५]:
     M G: kalpādhikāratve


[^११४]:
     M G: deśāntare 'py adhi-

- <u>तत्रैतौ</u> द्वाव् अपि पक्षाव् अप्राप्तौ । यद्य् अप्राप्तः संश्रयो विधीयते, कल्प्येताप्य् अधिकारः । तत्र चिन्त्यते । कतरः पक्षो युक्त इति । स तु नित्यकाम्यानाम्[^११६] उक्तया रीत्या एतद्देश एवानुष्ठानसंभवाद् अधिकृतानां प्राप्त एव । न ह्य् एतद्देशव्यतिरेकेण कृत्स्नधर्मानुष्ठानसंभवः । तथा हि, हिमवति तावत् काश्मीरादौ शीतेनार्दिता न बहिः संध्योपासने ऽधिक्रियन्ते, न च यथाविधि स्वाध्यायसंभवः "प्राग् वोदग् वा ग्रामाद् उपनिष्क्रम्य" इति । न हि हेमन्तशिशिरयोर् अहर् अहर् नदीस्नानादिसंभवः ।


[^११६]:
     M G: tv anityakāmyānām

- इदम् एव च **द्विजातय** इति वचनलिङ्गम्[^११७] । न कश्चिद् एव देशो ऽसति म्लेच्छसंबन्धे स्वत एव म्लेच्छदेशः । अन्यथा तद्देशसंबन्धान् म्लेच्छत्वे कथं द्विजातित्वम् ।


[^११७]:
     M G: vacanaṃ liṅgam

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । न गमनमात्रान् म्लेच्छता, अपि तु निवासात् । स चानेन प्रतिषिध्यते ।

- <u>तच् च न</u> । संश्रयो ऽत्र श्रूयते । स च देशान्तरे भवतस् तत्त्यागेनान्यदेशसंबन्धः । न संश्रितस्यैव संश्रयणम् । अन्यथा एवम् एवावक्ष्यत्- एतान् देशांस् त्यक्त्वा नान्यत्र निवसेत् । अथ सिद्धे संश्रयणे तद्वचनम् अन्यनिवृत्तियर्थम् इति, परिसंख्या तथा स्यात् । तस्याश् च त्रयो दोषाः । अथ श्रुतार्थहानिर्[^११८] लक्ष्यते- "एतान् देशान् न जह्यात्" इति । न श्रुतार्थसंभवे लक्षणा युक्ता । अत एव न भूतपूर्वगतिः । तस्माल् लिङ्गम्[^११९] इदं न देशसंबन्धेन पुरुषा म्लेच्छाः, किं तर्हि, पुरुषसंबन्धेन म्लेच्छदेशता ।


[^११९]:
     M G 1st ed.: liṅgād


[^११८]:
     M G: arthahānir; J: atha hānir 

- शूद्रस्य द्विजातिशुश्रूषाया विहितत्वात् तद्देशनिवासे सर्वदा प्राप्ते तत्राजीवतो देशान्तरनिवासो ऽभ्यनुज्ञायते । यदा बहुकुटुम्बतया शुश्रूषाशक्त्या वा यं द्विजातिम्[^१२०] आश्रितः स एनं[^१२१] बिभृयात्, तदा देशान्तरे संभवति धनार्जने निवसेत् । तत्रापि न म्लेच्छभूयिष्ठे, किं तर्हि, याज्ञिये, म्लेच्छावृते यानासनाशनादिक्रियानिमित्तस्य संसर्गस्यापरिहार्यत्वात् तद्भावापत्तिप्रसङ्गात् ।


[^१२१]:
     DK (5: 762) suggests: enaṃ na


[^१२०]:
     M G 1st ed.: vā dvijātiyam

- **वृत्तिकर्शितो** वृत्त्यभावपीडितः । वृत्तिर् आत्मकुटुम्बस्थितिसमर्थं धनम् । तदभावे यत् कर्शनं तत्संबन्धितयोच्यते, यथा "वर्षाकृते सुभिक्षदुर्भिक्षे" वर्षाभावकृतं दुर्भिक्षं वर्षाकृतत्वेन[^१२२] व्यपदिश्यते । **यस्मिंस् तस्मिन्न्** इति अनियमम्[^१२३] आह[^१२४] ॥ २.२४ ॥


[^१२४]:
     M G: place this sentence as an introduction to verse 25.


[^१२३]:
     G: atiniyamam


[^१२२]:
     M G 1st ed.: varṣakṛtatvena
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author now proceeds to state that injunction for the sake whereof
the names of several countries have been set forth.

‘*The twice-born people*.’ even though they be born in another country,
should ‘*resort these countries’ i.e*. to *Brahmāvarta*, etc. Abandoning
the country of their birth, they should make every effort to reside in
*Brahmāvarta* and the other countries just described.

In connection with this some people hold that the injunction of residing
in these countries is with a view to unseen (spiritual) results; the
sense being that even though certain results might accrue to one in
other countries also, yet people should reside in these countries; and
when we come to look for the reward of such residence,—we may conclude,
either (*a*) that the residence in the said countries is enjoined as
purificatory, just like bathing in the Gaṅgā and other sacred
places,—the idea being that just as the water of one place is more
sacred than that of another, so also it is only some regions that are
sacred, as has been described in the *Purāṇas*; or (*b*) that from the
mere residence itself the man goes to Heaven, this assumption being on
the analogy of the *Viśvajit* sacrifice.

Neither of these two views is admissible. If the present verse had laid
down such residence as would not be possible (without this injunction),
then there might be some justification for assuming a reward, and for
considering which of the two alternatives mentioned (in the previous
paragraph) is the more reasonable. As a matter of fact however, the
possibility of the residence in question is already secured by the fact
that it is only in the said countries that the performance of the
compulsory and optional rites is possible; in fact, apart from the said
countries, there is no possibility of the performance of *Dharma* in its
entirity. For instance, in the snowy regions of Kāśmīra and such places,
people suffer so much from cold that they are unable to attend to their
evening prayers outside their house; nor (for the same reason) is it
possible to read the Veda in the proper manner, going out either to the
east or to the north of the village; nor lastly, is it possible to bathe
in the river every day during the winter.

-----------------

The implication of the expression ‘*twice-born people*’ is that no
country can be ‘the land of mlecchas’ except when it is inhabited by
mlechhas. For otherwise any man entering that country would at once
become a ‘mleccha’; and as such how could he be a ‘twice born’ person?
It might be argued that—“by merely entering that country one does not
become a *mleccha*, he becomes so only by residing there, and it is this
residence that is prohibited here.”—But this can not bo accepted;
because what is mentioned here is ‘resorting,’ which connotes the idea
of the man being born in one country and then leaving it and going to
another country; and there can be no ‘resorting’ to a place which is
already inhabited. If this were not meant, then the Author would have
simply said that ‘one should never reside in any other country after
renouncing these.’ It might be argued that “the ‘resorting’ being
already accomplished, the re-iteration of it serves the purpose of
precluding others.”—But in that case this would become a ‘*Parisankhyā*’
a ‘Preclusive Injunction and such injunctions are beset with three
defects.

It might be argued that “it is the *abandoning* (of the countries) that
is indirectly indicated, the sense being that one should never abandon
these countries.”

But so long as the direct meaning of a text is admissible, there can bo
no justification for admitting an indirect indication. For this reason
what has been said above cannot be accepted. From all this it follows
that what the words imply is that men do not become ‘*mlecchas*’ by
merely coming into contact with a certain country, it is the country
that becomes ‘the land of *mlecchas*’ through the contact of men
(*mlecchas*).

In as much as service of the twice-born people constitutes the
prescribed duty of the *śūdra*, it follows as a matter of course that
the latter should reside where the former reside; but if he fails to
obtain a living in that country, then he may go. and live in another
country; this is what is permitted (in the latter part of the verse).
When the man comes to have a large family, or becomes unfit for
service,—even though the twice-born person on whom he is dependent may
be prepared to support him,—the *śūdra* may go and live in another
country, where there may be a chance for him to acquire wealth. But even
so he should never live in a country where *mlecchas* form the majority
of inhabitants; he should betake himself to a land fit for sacrifices;
because if he lived in a country abounding in *mlecchas* it would be
impossible for him to avoid their contact, in the course of moving,
sitting, eating and so fourth; so that there would be the fear of his
becoming a *mleccha*.

‘*Distressed for a living*,’—*i.e*., suffering from want of a living.
‘*Living*’ means wealth sníficient for the maintaining of one’s family.
In the absence of such ‘living,’ there is a curtain amount of
‘distress;’ and this distress which is caused by the want of living is
spoken of as caused by the ‘living’ itself; just as good harvest being
the effect of rain, famine is caused by *want of rain*, but is spoken of
as ‘caused *by rain*.’

‘*In any country*’ implies want of restriction.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in the *Aparārka* (p. 6) as permitting the *Śūdra*
to reside, for the sake of livelihood, in ‘*Mleccā*’ countries also;—in
the *Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā, p. 56), which explains ‘*vṛtti*’ as
‘livelihood ‘*karṣitaḥ*’ as ‘in difficulty’, and the compound
‘*vṛttikarṣitaḥ*’ as ‘one who is in difficulties regarding
livelihood—and in the *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 4).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana*, 1-30.—‘Āraṭṭa, Kāraskara, Puṇḍraka, Sauvīra, Baṅga,
Kaliṅga, Prāsūna,—if one goes to those countries, he should perform the
expiatory rite of either Punaḥstoma or Sarvapṛṣṭhā.

*Baudhāyana*.—‘Anantaka (Dvārakā), Aṅga, Magadha, Surāṣṭra, Dakṣiṇāpatha
Upāvṛt, Sindhu, Sauvīra, these countries are of *mixed origin*.’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Vīra-Pari., p. 59).—‘A person horn in Āryāvarta either
twice-born or not, should never cross the Karmāda (Karmanāśā), the
Sindhu or the Karatoyā. The twice-born person should never go beyond
Āryāvarta except on pilgrimage, or in obedience to the order of his
parents.’ In Magadha, the sacred places of pilgrimage are Gaya, the
river Poonpoon; the Hermitage of Chyavana and the forest of Rājagṛha.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa* (*Ibid*).—‘Kāñchī, Kośala, Saurāṣṭra, Karṇāṭa, Kacheha,
Kāverī, Kolvaṇa (land near the Tryambaka Hill, near Nāsik),—these tracts
are not commended. That tract of land over which the five rivers
(Śatadru, Vipāśā, Airāvaiī, Chandrabhāgā and Vitastā) flow is called
*Āraṭṭa*; the Ārya should not permanently dwell in this country. One who
crosses the Narmadā, the Sindhu aud the Kosi, or goes to the West of
Puṣkara, and lives there beyond the time of pilgrimage, goes to
hell.—Aṅga, Baṅga, Kaliṅga, Andhra, Madra, Mālavika, tract to the South
of the Narmadā or to the North of the Sindhu, Pauṇḍra, Surāṣṭra,
Vaindhya, Māgadhaka, Khaśa,—these are all sinful tracts.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa (Ibid*).—‘The country bounded on the South by the Mahānadī,
and on the North by Magadha is the *country of Triśaṅku*, with an area
of 48 square miles; this country should be avoided.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa* (*Ibid*, p. 57).—‘Wise men should take shelter in that
country where there is prosperity due to the black antelope, barley,
grass, the four castes and the four life-stages.’

*Skanda-purāṇa* (Vira-Pari., p. GO).—‘Aṅga, Baṅga, Kaliṅga, Parvata,
Khaśa, Sindhu, Sauvīra, Saurāṣṭra, Pārada, Andhra, Mālava,—these the
twice-born should avoid. But when pressed for livelihood, the
Householder may betake himself to these countries.’

*Bhaviṣya purāṇa* (Do., p. 55).—Brahmāvarta is the best country; less
than that is the Ṛṣideśa; less than this latter is the Madhyadeśa; next
to that comes the Āryāvarta.’

*Chāndogya Upaniṣad* (quoted in Vīra-Paribhāṣā, p. 60).—‘One shall not
approach the Caṇḍāla, nor the inferior country.’

*Pitāmaha* (Do., p. 60).—‘One may reside even in the kingdom of the
Śūdra, if the Gaṅgā flows through it: even though that country may he
inhabited by uncultured people, yet it is a sacred land.

*Vyāsa* (Do., p. 61).—‘Those places, those countries, those mountains
and those hermitages are sacred through which the best of rivers, the
Gaṅgā, flows.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘The righteous man should reside at Prabhāsa,
at Puṣkara, at Kāśī, at Naimiṣa, at Amarakaṇṭaka, on the Gaṅgā or on the
Sarayū.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

024	Let twice-born men seek to dwell in those (above-mentioned countries); but a Sudra, distressed for subsistence, may reside anywhere.
</details>
