+++
title = "025 एषा धर्मस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has the source of Dharma been briefly explained to you, as also the origin of all this (world). Learn now the duties of the several castes.—(25).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिक्रान्तस्य सर्वस्य ग्रन्थार्थस्य पिण्डार्थकथनम् अविस्मरणार्थम् । **योनिः** कारणम् । **समासेन** संक्षेपेण । **संभवश् चेति** प्रथमाध्यायार्थावमर्शः । **अस्य सर्वस्येति** । जगन्निर्माणं बुद्ध्या प्रत्यक्षीकृत्य निर्दिशति । वर्णानुष्ठेया धर्मा **वर्णधर्माः** । तान् **निबोधत** । विस्तरेणेति विशेषः ।

- इह पञ्चप्रकारो धर्म इति स्मृतिविवरणकाराः प्रपञ्चयन्ति- वर्णधर्म आश्रमधर्मो वर्णाश्रमधर्मो नैमित्तिको[^१२५] गुणधर्मश् चेति । तत्र यो जातिमात्रम् अपेक्ष्य प्रवृत्तो न वयोविभागाश्रमादिकम् आश्रयति स वर्णधर्मः । यथा "ब्राह्मणो न हन्तव्यः," ब्राह्मणेन सुरा न पेया" इति । जातिमात्रस्यान्त्याद् उच्छ्वासाद् एष धर्मः । आश्रमधर्मो यत्र जातिर् नापेक्ष्यते केवला, तदाश्रमप्रतिपत्तिर्[^१२६] आश्रीयते । यथा "ब्रह्मचारिणो ऽग्नीन्धनभिक्षाचरणे" (ग्ध् २.८) । वर्णाश्रमधर्म उभ्यापेक्षः । यथा "मौर्वी ज्या क्षत्रियस्य" (म्ध् २.४२) इत्यादिः । नाश्रमान्तरे न च जात्यन्तरस्य धारणम् अस्या उदाहरणम् । प्रथमोपादानं तूपनयनधर्मो[^१२७] नाश्रमधर्मः । उपनयनं चाश्रमार्थं[^१२८] नाश्रमधर्मः । नैमित्तिको द्रवशुद्ध्यादिः । गुणम् आश्रितो गुणधर्मः, "षड्भिः परिहार्यश् च" (ग्ध् ८.१२) इत्यादिः । बाहुश्रुत्येन गुणेनैते धर्माः । एवम् अभिषिक्तस्य क्षत्रियस्य ये धर्माः । 


[^१२८]:
     M G: vāśramārthaṃ


[^१२७]:
     G: tūpanayanaṃ dharmo


[^१२६]:
     J: yadāśrama-


[^१२५]:
     J adds: dharmo

- तद् एतद् वर्णग्रहणेन सर्वं गृहीतम् इति दर्शितम् । अवान्तरभेदस् तु तत[^१२९] एवावतिष्ठते । पुरुषत्वमात्राश्रिता अवर्णधर्मा अपि सन्ति । ते ऽपि भेदेन वाच्याः स्युः । एवम् अन्यो ऽपि भेदो ऽभ्यूह्यः । वर्णग्रहणं चात्र प्रदर्शनार्थम्, नान्तरप्रभवव्युदासार्थम् । पूर्वं प्रतिज्ञातत्वात् तदनुवादिनी ह्य् एषा प्रतिज्ञा ॥ २.२५ ॥


[^१२९]:
     M G 1st ed.: -bhedas tu nety
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Here we have the recapitulation of all that has gone before,—and this
for the purpose of refreshing the memory.

‘*Yoniḥ*’—‘*source*,’ *cause*.

‘*Samāśena*’—‘*briefly*,’ *in brief*.

‘*Sambhavaśca*’—‘*also the origin*’—this refers to what has gone in
Discourse I.

‘*Of all this*’—this refers to the ‘creation of the world,’ which is
recalled in the form of a mental picture, and thus brought before the
eye (which makes it capable of being referred to by the pronoun ‘this’).

‘*The duties of the several castes*’—The duties that should he performed
by the various castes.

‘*Learn*’—*i.e*. in detail.

In this connection, the author of the *Smṛtivivaraṇa* describes five
kinds of *Dharma* or Duty:—

1.  ‘*Varṇa-dharma*,’ ‘duties pertaining to caste;’
2.  ‘*Āśrama-dharma*,’ ‘Duties pertaining to Life-stages,’
3.  ‘*Varṇāśrama-dharma*,’ ‘duties pertaining to caste and life-stage’;
4.  ‘*Naimittika-Dharma*,’ ‘Occasional Duties,’
5.  and ‘*Guṇa-Dharma*’ ‘Duties pertaining to qualification.’—

\(1\) Of these, that which proceeds entirely on the basis of caste, and
takes no account of age, life-stage or any such circumstances, is called
‘duty pertaining to castes;’ *e.g*., what is laid down in such rules
as—‘the *Brāhmaṇa* should not be killed,’ ‘wine shall not be drank by
the *Brāhmaṇa*’—refers to a particular caste only, and is meant to apply
to every person of that caste till his very last breath.

\(2\) ‘Duty pertaining to life-stage’ is that which does not depend upon
caste only, but takes account of a particular life-stage also; *e.g*.,
‘Fire-kindling and alms-begging are the duties of the Vedic student’
(*Gautama* 2.8).

\(3\) ‘Duty pertaining to caste and life-stage’ is that which is related
to both; *e g*., when it is prescribed that ‘the bow-string made of
grass is the girdle for the Kṣatriya student,’ it means that what is
mentioned does not apply to any other life-stage (than that of the
student), nor to any other caste (except the Kṣatriya);—what is meant to
he the example here is the *wearing* of the girdle during student-life,
not the *first* taking of it, which forms part of the *Upanayana-rites*,
and does not pertaiṇ to the particular life-stage; and the *Upanayana*
itself is what ushers in a particular life-stage, and it is not a ‘duty
pertaining to the life-stage.’

\(4\) The ‘Occasional Duty’ consists of such acts as the *purifying of
things* and so forth.

\(5\) ‘Duty pertaining to qualifications’ is that which is presented in
connection with special qualifications; *e.g*., what is laid down in
such rules as ‘he should be absolved from six’ is with reference to the
qualification of ‘vast learning;’ to this same category belong also all
those duties that are laid down for the ‘annointed’ Kṣatriya.

All these are meant to be included under the ‘*of the castes*’
(mentioned in the text); and hence the text mentions those only; and it
does not make mention of the sub-divisions, because in the first place
there are endless subdivisions, and secondly, (if the text went about
mentioning all possible kinds of duties) it would have to mention those
many duties also which are laid down for men in general, without
reference to any particular caste. Similarly with other varieties of
‘Duty.’ In fact the ‘Duties pertaining to castes’ have been mentioned
only as an indication; it does not mean that the duties of the mixed
castes are excluded from consideration; because this latter has also
been promised (in 1.2) as the subject to lie expounded; and the present
statement is only meant to be the reiteration of that promise.—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dharmasya*’—Govindarāja alone takes this to mean ‘spiritual merit
others agree in taking it as ‘duties

*Medhātithi* (p. 78,1.28)—‘*Iha pañcaprakāro dharmoḥ*’—This view is here
attributed to the author of the *Smṛtivivaraṇa*. Kullūka quotes the
*Bhaviṣyapurāṇa* to the same effect.

Modern writers and lecturers on what they call ‘*Varṇā-śramadharma*’
should note the exact connotation of this name, as here explained by
Medhātithi.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

025	Thus has the origin of the sacred law been succinctly described to you and the origin of this universe; learn (now) the duties of the castes (varna).
</details>
