+++
title = "026 वैदिकैः कर्मभिः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the twice-born persons corporeal consecration, beginning with ‘Conception,’ should be performed with auspicious Vedic rites; it purifies in this world and also after death.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वैदिकैः कर्मभिः पुण्यैर्  
निषेकादिर् द्विजन्मनाम् ।  
कार्यः शरीरसंस्कारः  
पावनः प्रेत्य चेह च  ॥ २.२६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*Vedic rites*’ spoken of here are *mantra-recitations*. ‘*Veda*’
here stands for *mantras*; and what ‘arises out of them’ (which is what
is expressed by the affix in ‘*Vaidikaiḥ*’) is the ‘reciting’; hence the
nominal affix ‘*ṭhañ*’ comes under the provisions of the Vārtika on
Pāṇini, 4. 3. 60.

Or, the word ‘*vaidika*’ (Vedic) may he taken as figuratively applied to
the *rites*, on the ground of their source lying in the Veda. ‘*Karma*,’
‘Rites,’ would, in this case, stand for the *act* constituting the
procedure; and hence becomes possible the differentiation and the
relation of cause and effect (between the *Karma* and the *Saṁskāra*
which is expressed in the assertion—‘the consecration, *saṁskāra*,
should he performed *by means of* the Rites?

‘*Conception*’—is the depositing of the semen in the womb, and
‘*niṣekādiḥ*’ stands for that body of sacraments to he described below,
which liegins with the said ‘Conception’ and ends with ‘Initiation’ (
*Upanayana*). The singular number in ‘*Śarīrasaṁskāraḥ*,’ ‘corporeal
consecration,’ is due to the whole body of sacraments being taken
collectively. ‘*Consecration*’ means the preparation of a qualified
body; and the Eeveral sacraments serve to produce in the body special
qualifications.

This is what is meant by the term ‘*pāvanaḥ*,’ ‘*it nurifies*,’ removes
impurities.

‘*In* *this world* *and also after death*’.—This means that the person
duly consecrated becomes entitled to the performance of all those acts
that, like the *Kārīri* and other sacrifices, lead to material results,
-as also those that, like the Jyotiṣṭoma etc., bring spiritual rewards;
and hence the consecrations are of use in both worlds.

‘*Puṇyaiḥ*’—‘*auspicious*,’ *ie*., propitious; *i.e*., they bring good
luck and remove bad luck. Thus there is a clear difference between the
word ‘*puṇy* *a*’ and ‘*pāvana*’ here.

‘*For the twice-born persons*,’—this serves to exclude the *Śūdras*.
This word serves to point out who are the persons to be consecrated; and
it is only by indirect indication that the three higher castes arc
understood to be meant; for before consecration, they are not yet
‘twice-born’ (the ‘second birth’ consisting of the consecration).—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vaidikaiḥ karmabhiḥ*’.—The term ‘*vaidika-karma*’ here stands for
*Vedic mantras*;—or for rites prescribed in the Veda. Both explanations
are found in Medhātithi and Govindarāja; Kullūka notes only the latter
explanation.

This verse has been quoted in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 132) as
laying down the necessity of performing the *Saṃskāras*. Here also both
the above explanations are noted.—It explains the term ‘*śarīra*’ in the
compound ‘*Śarīrasaṃskāraḥ*’ to stand for the *constituents of the
body*.—‘*In this world and also after death*’—has been explained as
implying that the Saṃskāras help ‘after death’ by enabling the man to
perform such sacrifices as lead him to heaven, and they help ‘in this
world’ by enabling him to perform such sacrifices as the *Kārīrī* and
the like, which bring desirable results in the world, in the shape of
rain, children and so forth.—It is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 36), to the effect that sacramental rites are performed
with Vedic Mantras in the ease of the *Twice-bom* persons only; it adds
that these sacraments are called ‘*pāvana*’, ‘purificatory’ of the
person, because, performed with Vedic Mantras, they serve to destroy
sins.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 7.7.—‘Sanctified by means of the forty
sacraments.’

*Gautama-Dharmnsūtra*, 7.14.—‘Four are the Vedic observances.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.10.—‘From Conception till Death, the rites of the
Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya are performed with Mantras.’

*Yama* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 132).—‘The Śūdra also should be sanctified;
hut without Mantras,’

*Baijavapa* (*Ibid*).—‘For the Śūdra also, the following sacraments have
been ordained—Niṣeka, Puṃsavana, Sīmantonnayana, Jātakarma, Nāmakaraṇa,
Annaprāśana, and Chaula,—as to he done without Mantras.’

*Jātūkarṇya* (*Ibid*, p. 134)—‘For the Śūdra, there is Marriage as also
the Final (Death) Rites.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	With holy rites, prescribed by the Veda, must the ceremony on conception and other sacraments be performed for twice-born men, which sanctify the body and purify (from sin) in this (life) and after death.
</details>
