+++
title = "030 नामधेयन् दशम्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should have his ‘naming’ (Nāmadheya) done on the tenth or the twelfth (day), on an auspicious lunar date and at an auspicious moment. and under a propitious lunar asterism.—(30)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दशम्यां** तिथौ **द्वादश्यां वस्य** दारकस्य **नामधेयं** कुर्वीत । णिजर्थो न विवक्षितः । तथा च गृह्यम्- "दशम्याम् उत्थाप्य पिता नाम करोति" (पार्ग् १.१७.१) इति । नामैव नामधेयम् । येन शब्देन कार्येष्व् आहूयते तन् नाम । "प्राङ् नाभिवर्धनात्" (म्ध् २.२९) इति जातकर्मणः प्रकृतत्वाज् जन्मनः प्रभृति दशमीद्वादश्यौ गृह्येते न चन्द्रतिथी ।

- <u>इह केचिद्</u> दशमीग्रहणम् आशौचनिवृत्तिर् इत्य् उपलक्षणार्थं वर्णयन्ति । अतीतायाम् इति चाध्याहारः दशम्याम् अतीतायां ब्राह्मणस्य द्वादश्यां क्षत्रियस्य पञ्चदश्यां वैश्यस्येति । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तं</u>[^१५३] । लक्षणायां प्रमाणाभावाज् जातकर्मवद् आशौचे ऽपि करिष्यते । यदि तु ब्राह्मणभोजनं विहितं क्वचित् तदा युक्ता लक्षणा । यदि दशमीद्वादश्यौ वक्ष्यमाणगुणयुक्ते भवतः तदा तयोः कर्तव्यम् । अथ न, तदान्यस्मिन्न् अपि **पुण्ये** ऽहनि । पुण्यान्य् अहानि द्वितीयापञ्चम्यादीनि । पुण्यं प्रशस्तम्, नवमीचतुर्दश्यादयो रिक्तास् तिथयः अपुण्याः । **मुहूर्तो** लग्नं कुम्भादि । तस्मिन् पुण्ये पापग्रहैर् अनधिष्ठिते गुरुभ्यां च दृश्यमाने । लग्नशुद्धिर् ज्योतिषाद् अवगम्यते । **नक्षत्रे** च गुणयुक्ते । नक्षत्रं श्रविष्ठादि, तद् यस्मिन्न् अहनि गुणयुक्तं भवति । नक्षत्रगुणाश् च क्रूरग्रहपापग्रहविष्टिव्यतीपातविवर्जितम्[^१५४] । वाशब्दः समुच्चये । तेन प्रशस्तायां तिथौ नक्षत्रे च शुद्धे लग्न इत्य् उपदिष्टं भवति । समुच्चयश् च ज्योतिषावगम्यः । अयं च परमार्थः । दशमीद्वाधशमीभ्याम् अर्वाङ् न कर्तव्यम् । उत्तरकालं च यद् अहर् नक्षत्रं लग्नं परिशुद्धं तद् अहर् एव कर्तव्यम् ॥ २.३० ॥


[^१५४]:
     M G 1st ed.: -viṣṭipātavivarjitam


[^१५३]:
     G: tad uktaṃ

_इदानीं यादृशं नाम कर्तव्यं तन् नियमयति स्वरूपतो ऽर्थतश् च ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One should perform the ‘naming,’ ‘*Nāmadheya*,’ of the child on the
tenth or the twelfth day.

No significance is meant to be attached to the sense of the causative
affix in ‘*Kārayet*,’ should *have* *it done*.’ For the *Gṛhyasūtra*
simply says—‘On the tenth day the father should take up the child and
*perform* his naming’ (without the causal form).

The term ‘*Nāmadheya*’ means simply ‘*nāma*,’ ‘name’; and it is that
word by which a person is called during life.

In as much as the section has started with the mentiou of the
‘*Jātakarma*,’ as to be done ‘before the cutting of the umbilical cord,’
it follows that the ‘*tenth*’ and ‘*twelfth*’ (of the Text) refer to the
day as counted from the day of birth; and they do not refer to the
*lunar dates*.

On this point some people have held that the mention of the ‘tenth day’
is only meant to indicate the ‘passing of the days of impurity’; the
past-participle epithet ‘*atītāyām*,’ ‘having passed,’ being understood.
So that the meaning is that, ‘for the *Brāhmaṇa* the Naming should be
done after the lapse of the tenth day, for the *Kṣatriya* after the
lapse of the twelfth day, and for the *Vaiśya* after the lapse of the
fifteenth day.’

This explanation, however, is not right. For there being no ground for
taking the words in the indirect figurative sense suggested, the
ceremony could very well be performed during the period of impurity,
just like the ‘Birth-rite.’ If the feeding of the Brāhmaṇas were
enjoined (as a necessary accompaniment of the Ṛte), then there might be
some justification for the suggested figurative interpretation.

If the ‘tenth’ or the ‘twelfth’ day happen to fulfil the conditions
mentioned in the second line of the verse, then the ceremony should be
done on those days. Otherwise it should be performed on some other
*auspicious lunar date*.

The ‘auspicious lunar dates’ are the, the *fifth* (day of the lunar
month), and so forth.

‘*Puṇya*,’ ‘*auspicious*,’ means *commended*. The *ninth, fourteenth*
and such other days (of the lunar month),—which are commonly called
‘*Riktā*,’—are ‘not commended,’ ‘inauspicious.’

‘*Muhūrta*,’ ‘*moment*,’ stands for what is called ‘*lagna*’ (the point
of time indicated by the ‘contact with the Horizon,’ *i.e*., the
‘rising,’ of a particular Zodiacal Sign), Aquarius, and the rest. ‘At a
moment that is *auspicious*,’—*i.e*., which is not possessed by any evil
planet, which is looked upon by Jupiter and Venus. Such ‘auspiciousness’
of the moment can be ascertained with the help of the science of
Astrology.

‘*Under a propitious lunar asterism*,’—the ‘are those beginning with
*Śraviṣṭhā*; and that day on which these happen to be ‘propitious.’ The
‘propitiousness’ of the Lunar Asterism consists in its being free from
the contact of ‘malignant’ and ‘evil’ planets, as also from the
condition of ‘*Vyatīpāta*’ (a malignant aspect of the Sun and the Moon).

The particle ‘*Vā*’ in the Text has a collective sense (meaning ‘and’);
hence the meaning is that ‘the ceremony should he performed on an
auspicious day, *and* at an auspicious moment, *and* under a faultless
lunar asterism.’ The due combination of all these conditions can be
ascertained with the help of the Science of Astrology.

The final upshot of the whole comes to this:—The ceremony should never
be performed before the tenth or twelfth day,—and after these days it
may be performed only at the auspicious moment on that day which is
found to be under a propitious lunar asterism.’—(30)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Daśamyām dvādaśyām*’—‘The tenth of twelfth day of the
month’—Medhātithi, who also notes and rejects the explanation—‘after the
lapse of the tenth or twelfth day—i.e., ‘on the lapsing of the period of
impurity’—which is accepted by Kullūka.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 233) where it
notes the latter explanation and says that it has been rejected by
Medhātithi and Aparārka. It is curious that having the work of
Medhātithi before him, the author of Vīramitrodaya did not note his
explanation that the ceremony is to be performed on the 10th or 12th day
(*tithi*) of the month.

The verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 855) also, where however no
explanation is given—and in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 371), where it is added
that what is meant is that the naming of the Brāhmaṇa should be done *on
the expiry of the tenth day*, of the Kṣatriya *on the expiry of the
twelfth day*, of the Vaiśya *on the expiry of the sixteenth day* and of
the Shudra *on the expiry of the twenty-first day*;—and the second half
of the verse lays down substitutes.

This verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 24), which adds that
‘*daśamyām*’ has been taken as ‘*daśamyām añtāyam*’, ‘after the lapse of
the tenth day’,—that no significance attaches to the causal affix in
‘*kārayet*’;—in *Saṃskāṛaratnamālā* (p. 850), which adds that the causal
affix in ‘*kārayet*’ has the reflexive sense;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 34a);—and in *Sṛmticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 52), which
explains meaning as ‘on the tenth day from the day of the birth, the
*father* should do the naming’, it being the father’s business to do
this.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.5.—‘The naming should be done after the lapse of the
period of impurity.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.12.—‘The naming on the eleventh day.’ *Āśvalāyana*
(Gṛhyasūtrā, 1.4).—‘They should give him a name.’

*Pāraskara* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 1.17.11).—‘On the tenth day, the father should
take him up, and after having fed the Brāhmaṇas, should perform the
naming ceremony.’

*Gobhila* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 2.7.7).—‘On the expiry of ten days, or hundred
days, or a year, after birth, the Naming.’

*Jyotirvaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 231).—‘The naming of the
boy should be done either on the day of birth, or on the twelfth day, or
in special cases, on the tenth day.’

*Maheśvara (Ibid*).—‘The Jātakarma and the naming of the boy should he
done either by the father or brothers at the time of birth; or on the
twelfth day from birth, or on the first day.’

\[The *naming* on the day of birth refers to the imparting of a secret
name, which is done along with the Jātakarma; see above.\]

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa (Ibid*).—‘The father should do the naming on the tenth
day.’

*Vyāsa (Ibid*).—‘Some wise men hold that the naming is to be done on the
tenth day; others mention the twelfth day; and yet others hold that it
should be done after the lapse of one full month.’

*Nārada* (Do.)—‘From the birth, on the tenth day, or the twelfth day, is
performed the naming of Brāhmaṇas; of the other two castes, it is on the
expiry of the period of impurity;—so also for Śūdras; hut some people
hold that the naming of the Śūdra should be done on the thirty-first
day.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.)—‘The naming has been prescribed as to be done on the
lapse of the period of impurity.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.)—‘The naming is prescribed as to be done on the tenth or
the twelfth dav.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.)—‘The naming should he done, for the Brāhmaṇa, on the
tenth or tho twelfth day; for the Kṣatriya on the thirteenth day; for
the Vaiśya on the sixteenth day; and for the Śūdra either on the
nineteenth (v. l. twentieth) or the thirty-second (v. l. twenty-second)
day.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.)—‘The naming of the twice-born castes should be done
on the twelfth, the sixteenth, the twentieth and the twenty-second day
respectively; for the Brāhmaṇa it may be done on the tenth also.’

*Bhaviṣyapurāṇa* (Do.)—‘On the expiry of the twelfth night, or,
according to others, on the expiry of one month, or, according to
others, on the eighteenth day.’

\[Thus we find that the choice lies among the following days—the day of
birth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, sixteenth, eighteenth,
nineteenth, twenty-second, thirty-first, hundred and first and the end
of a year.\]

As regards the ‘*puṇya tithi, muhūrta* and *nakṣatra*’ the reader is
referred to the Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, pp. 234-237.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

030	But let (the father perform or) cause to be performed the Namadheya (the rite of naming the child), on the tenth or twelfth (day after birth), or on a lucky lunar day, in a lucky muhurta, under an auspicious constellation.
</details>
