+++
title = "032 शर्मवद् ब्राह्मणस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The name of the Brāhmaṇa should be expressive of ‘peace,’ that of the Kṣatriya, of ‘protection’; that ot the Vaiśya, of ‘prosperity,’ and that of the Śūdra, of ‘submissiveness.’—(32)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्र स्वरूपग्रहणं पाठानुक्रमश् चादौ मङ्गल्यम् अन्ते शर्मशब्दः[^१६१] । तथा चोदाहृतम् । क्षत्रियादिनाम्नां तु नैतत् संभवति, रक्षाशब्दस्य स्त्रीलिङ्गस्य श्रवणात् पुंसां सामानाधिकरण्यानुपपत्तेः । तस्माद् एकोपक्रमत्वात् समाचाराच् च सर्वत्रार्थग्रहणं । वाक्यभेदाच् च समुच्चयः । यन् मङ्गल्यं तच् छर्मार्थवत् । शर्म[^१६२] शरणम् आश्रयः सुखं च । अर्थग्रहणात् स्वामिदत्तभभूत्यादिशब्दपरिग्रहः । इन्द्रस्वामीन्द्राश्रयः इन्द्रदत्तः[^१६३] । तदाश्रयता प्रतीयते । एवं सर्वत्रोन्नेयम् ।


[^१६३]:
     M G: indrāvato 'pi


[^१६२]:
     G omits: śarma


[^१६१]:
     M G: ete śarmaśabdāḥ

- <u>अथ</u> को ऽयं हेतुर् वाक्यभेदात् समुच्चय इति । "व्रीहिभिर् यजेत," "यवैर् यजेत" इति किं न समुच्चय इति । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । लिङ्गदर्शनमात्रम् एतत् पौरुषेयत्वात् ग्रन्थस्य । विकल्पे ऽभिप्रेते मङ्गल्यं शर्मवद् वेति लाघवाद् अवक्ष्यत् । वाक्यभेदे हि द्विराख्यातोच्चारणम् । तद् गुरु भवति । 

- **रक्षा** परिपालनम्, **पुष्टिर्** वृद्धिर् गुप्तिश् च । गोवृद्धो धनगुप्त इति । **प्रेष्यो** दासः । ब्राह्मणदासो देवदासो ब्राह्मणाश्रितो देवताश्रित इति ॥ २.३२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

\[What appears to be the meaning is that\] the actual term (‘*śarman*,’
etc.) should form part of the name,—and that the two terms (mentioned in
the preceding and the present verse) should appear in the order stated,
the ‘auspicious’ term coming at the beginning and the term ‘*śarman*’ at
the end (of the name),—as illustrated above (‘*Go-śarman*,’
‘*Dhana-śarman*’ and so forth).

But this would not be possible in regard to the names of the *Kṣatriya*
and the rest; because the term ‘*rakṣā*.’ (‘security,’ which is
mentioned in connection with the *Kṣatriya*) is of the feminine gender,
and as such could not be co-ordinated with the names of males. Hence in
view of conformity, and in view also of actual practice, and also in
view of the two verses being syntactically distinct, we should take them
as complementary to each other; the sense being that the ‘auspicious
name’ (mentioned in the preceding verse) should he ‘expressive of
*śarman*, Peace’—this term standing for *refuge, shelter, happiness*. It
is only if we take the term ‘*śarman*’ of the text as standing for what
is developed by it, that we have the possibility of names ending in
‘*svāmū*,’ ‘*datta*,’ ‘*bhūti*,’ and the rest; the name ‘*Indrasvāmī*’
meaning ‘he who has Indra for his shelter’; ‘*Indra-datta*’ also
signifies the fact of Indra being the *shelter*.

Similarly with all the rest (the names of the *Kṣatriya*, etc.)

“What does this argument mean—that, in view of the two verses being
syntactically distinct, we should take them as complementary to each
other? Por the same reason, why are not the two sentences ‘one should
sacrifice with *Vrīhi*’ and ‘one should sacrifice with *Yava*’ taken as
complementary (and not as optional alternatives, as they have been
taken)?”

What we have said is only what is indicated (by the words of the Text).
The Text being the work of a human writer, if he had intended the
statements to be optional alternatives, he should, for the sake of
brevity, have said ‘the name should be *either auspicious or expressive
of peace*’; when we have two distinct syntactical constructions, there
are two verbs, and this becomes too prolix (and the prolixity cannot be
justified except by taking the two as complementary). \[All this reason
ng, based upon *intention* and *propriety of speech*, cannot apply to
the case of Vedic sentences, where there is no author.\]

‘*Rakṣā*,’ is ‘protection,’ ‘preservation.’

‘*Puṣṭi*’ is ‘prosperity’ as well as ‘security.’ Such names as
‘*Govṛddha*’ ‘*Dhanagupta*.’

‘*Preṣya*’ is ‘submissive’; such names as ‘*Brāhmaṇa-dāsa*,’ and
‘*Devadāsa*,’ which means (respectively) ‘submissive to, dependent upon,
the Brāhmaṇa’ and ‘submissive to and dependent upon a deity.’—(32)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 243) also; and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra. p. 55) as laying down the subsidiary titles
of the four caste-names;—also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 309);—and in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 178).

*Parāśaramādḥava* (Ācāra, p. 441) quoting the verse explains it to mean
that ‘*śarman*’ must be the suffixed word to the Brāhmaṇa’s name.

Nārayaṇa and Rāghavānanda opine that the name of the Brāhmaṇa must
always contain the word ‘śarman’ itself. But Medhātithi and several
others hold that the name should connote what is connoted by the term
‘*śarman*.’

The present day practice, however, follows the former
explanation—‘*śarman*’.being regarded now as the suffixed title to every
Brāhmaṇa’s name.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1. 17.4.—‘*Śarma* for the Brāhmaṇa, *Varma* for
the Kṣatriya, *Gupta* for the Vaiśya.’

*Vyāsa-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 213).—‘*Śarma* is the name
commended for the Brāhmaṇa, *Varma* for the Kṣatriya, *Gupta* for the
Vaiśya, and *Dāsa* for the Śūdra.’

*Yama-Smṛti* (Do.).—‘*Śarma* and *Deva* for the Brāhmaṇa, *Rājā* for the
Kṣatriya, *Gupta* and *Datta* for the Vaiśya and *Dāsa* for the Śūdra.

These titles have been thus explained by Āśvalāyanāchārya:—‘The name of
the Brāhmaṇa should end with *Śarma* because he imparts *Śarma*
(happiness) to the world through his religious character, calmness and
self-control; that of the Kṣatriya should end with *Varmā*, because like
the *Varma* (armour), he protects the world from the three kinds of
pain; that of the Vaiśya should end with *Gupta*, because he fosters
(*gopāyati*) the people by giving them money at certain times; that of
the Śūdra should end with *Dāsa*, because he keeps the twice-born people
satisfied by constant service.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

032	(The second part of) a Brahmana's (name) shall be (a word) implying happiness, of a Kshatriya's (a word) implying protection, of a Vaisya's (a term) expressive of thriving, and of a Sudra's (an expression) denoting service.
</details>
