+++
title = "033 स्त्रीणां सुखोद्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That of women should be easily pronouncible, not harsh, of plain meaning, heart-captivating and auspicious; it should end in a long vowel and contain a benedictory term.—(33)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पुंस इत्य् अधिकृतत्वात् स्त्रीणाम् अप्राप्तौ नियम्यते । सुखेनोद्यते **सुखोद्यम्** । स्त्रीबालैर् अपि यत् सुखेनोच्चारयितुं शक्यते तत् स्त्रीणां नाम कर्तव्यम् । बाहुल्येन स्त्रीणां स्त्रीभिर् बालैश् च व्यवहारस् तेषां च स्वकरणसौष्टवाभावान्[^१६४] न सर्वं संस्कृतं शब्दम् उच्चारयितुं शक्तिर् अस्ति । अतो विशेषेणोपदिश्यते । न तु[^१६५] पुंसाम् असुखोद्यम् अभ्यनुज्ञायते । उदाहरणं मङ्गलदेवी चारुदती सुवनदेत्यादि । प्रत्युदाहरणं शर्मिष्ठा सुश्लिष्टाङ्गीति । **अक्रूरम्** अक्रूरार्थवाचि । क्रूरार्थवाचि क्रूरार्थं डाकिनी परुषेति । **विस्पष्टार्थं** यस्यार्थो व्याख्यानगम्यो न भवति, श्रुत एव विदुषाम् अविदुषां वार्थप्रतीतिं करोति । अविस्पष्टार्थं यथा- कामनिधा कारीषगन्ध्येति । कामस्य निधेव निधा तया कामस् तत्रैव तिष्ठतीति । एवं यावन् न व्याख्यातं तावन् नावगम्यते । एवं कारीषगन्धेर् दुहिता कारीषगन्ध्येति व्याख्यानम् अपक्ष्यते । **मनोहरं** चित्ताह्लादकरम्- आश्रेयसी । विपरीतं तु- कालाक्षी । शर्मवती रुद्रवतीति **मङ्गल्यम्** । विपरीतम्- अभागा मदभागेति । **दीर्घो वर्णो ऽन्ते** यस्य । विपरीतम्- शरत् । आशिषं वदतीत्य् **आशीर्वादम्** । **अभिधानं** शब्दः । तयोर् विशेषणसमासः । तद् यस्मिन्न् अस्ति विद्यते तद् **आशीर्वादाभिधानवत्**- सपुत्रा बहुपुत्रा कुलवाहिकेति । एते ह्य् अर्था आशीर्विषया । वपरीता- अप्रशस्ता अलक्षणेति । अथ मङ्गल्यस्याशीर्वादस्य च को विशेषः । न कश्चित् । वृत्तपूर्णार्थं तु भेदेनोपादानम् ॥ २.३३ ॥


[^१६५]:
     M G 1st ed.: tat tu


[^१६४]:
     M G: svakāraṇa-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Inasmuch as significance has been attached to the mention of the ‘male’
child (in verse 29), what has been said in the preceding verses is not
applicable to women; and the present verse is going to lay down rules
regarding the names of women.

‘*Easily pronouncible*’;—that which can be easily pronounced; the name
of women should be such as can be uttered, with ease, even by women and
children. It is mostly women and children that have got to deal with
women; and the woman’s organ of speech being not very efficient, she
cannot pronounce each and every Sanskrit word; hence the Text lays
stress upon this pronouncibility in the case of feminine names. This
however docs not mean that the masculine names may be unpronouncible. As
examples of ‘pronouncible’ names wo have, ‘*Maṅgala-devī*,’
‘*Chārudati*,’ ‘*Suvadanā*,’ etc., and as counter-examples (*i.e*., of
*unpronouncible* names), ‘*Śarmiṣṭhā*,’ ‘*Suśliṣṭāṅgī*,’ and the like.

‘*Not harsh*,’—*i.e*., not denoting any thing harsh; names denoting
harsh things are such as ‘*Ḍākinī*’ (Sorceress), ‘*Paruṣā*’ (Rough) and
so forth.

‘*Of plain meaning*,’—whose moaning does not need to be explained before
it is comprehended; which, as soon as it is heard, couveys its meaning
to the learned and the unlearned alike. As examples of names with
meanings not plain, we have, (*a*) ‘*Kāmaniḍhā*’ and (*b*)
‘*Kāriṣagandhī*’; the meaning of these terms is not comprehended until
the following explanations have been provided:—(*a*) ‘who is, as if it
were, the *very* receptacle of love, she in whom all love is contained,’
and (*b*) ‘*Kārīṣagandhī*’ is the ‘daughter of Kariṣagandhi.’

‘*Heart-captivating*,’—that which pleases the mind; *e.g*., ‘*Śreyasī*’;
while of the contrary kind we have the name ‘*Kālākṣī*.’

‘*Auspicious*,’—such as ‘*Śarmavatī*’; of the contrary kind is the name
‘*Abhāgā*,’ ‘M *andabhāgā*.’ ‘*Ending in a long vowel*,’—that which has
a long vowel at the end. Contrary to this is the name ‘*Śarat*.’

‘*Āśīrvāda*’ is *that which denotes benediction*; ‘*abhidhāna*’ is
*term*; and when the two are compounded in tho *dhāraya* form, we get
the meaning ‘*benedictory term*’; and the name that contains such a term
is called ‘*āśīrvādābhidhānavat*,’ ‘*containing a benedictory term*.’
Examples of such names—‘*Saputrā*,’ ‘*Bahuputrā*,’ ‘*Kulavāhikā*’; these
are benedictory names; of the contrary kind are such names as,
‘*Apraśastā*,’ ‘*Alakṣaṇā*.’

“What is the difference between ‘auspicious’ and ‘benedictory’?”

None whatsoever. The second epithet has been added only for the purpose
of filling up the metre.—(33)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 441), which cites
the typical female name ‘*Śrīdāsī*.’

This is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 631).

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 243) quotes the verse, and having
explained the words, cites as examples—‘*Yaśodā*’ (easily pronouncible)
‘*Kulaghnī*’ (harsh)—‘*Indirā*’ (not of plain meaning)—‘*Kamahīyā*’
(heart-captivating)—‘*Subhadrā*’ (auspicious)—and ‘*Saubhāgyavatī*’
(containing a benedictory term).

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 310) simply quotes the verse;—and *Aparārka* (p.
27) quotes it as laying down rules regarding the first part of female
names.

This is quoted in *Smṛti candrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 55), which adds the
following notes—‘*sukhodyam*,’ easily pronouncible,—‘*maṅgalyam*’
denoting auspiciousness;—‘*dīrghavarṇa*, the long ī. or ā.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghuśātātapa*, 35.—‘The girl should not be named after a river or an
asterism or a tree; nor should she have a terrifying name.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.15.9.—‘The names of girls should consist of
an odd number of letters.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 2.7.15.—‘The names of girls should be soft and
consisting of an odd number of letters.’

*Śaunaka* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 213).—‘The name of males should
contain even, and of females odd, number of letters.’

*Baijavāpa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 243).—‘The name of the woman
should consist of three letters and should end in the long *ī*.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 243).—‘The name of males should
contain an even number of letters, and of females odd number of
letters.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

033	The names of women should be easy to pronounce, not imply anything dreadful, possess a plain meaning, be pleasing and auspicious, end in long vowels, and contain a word of benediction.
</details>
