+++
title = "034 चतुर्थे मासि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the fourth month should be performed the ceremony of the child’s ‘Egress’ from the room; and in the sixth month the ceremony of ‘Feeding’; or, whatever might be regarded as auspicious in the family.—(34)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

जन्म**चतुर्थमासे** **गृहाद्** बहिर् **निष्क्रमणम्** आदित्यदर्शनं **शिशोर्** बालस्य **कर्तव्यम्** । त्रीन् मासान् गर्भगृह एव वासयेत् । शिशुग्रहणं शूद्रस्यापि प्राप्त्यर्थम् । एवं षष्ठे माश्य् अप्य् अन्नप्राशनम् । पञ्चमासान् क्षीराहार एव । **यद् वा कुले** दारकस्य स्रेयस्यं **मङ्गल्यं** पूतना शकुनिकैकवृक्षोपहारादि प्रसिद्धम् । कालविशेषे वा तत् कर्तव्यम् । अयं च संस्कारशेषः । तेन नामधेयम् उक्तलक्षणव्यतिरेकेणापि यथाकुलधर्मं लभ्यते । इन्द्रस्वामी इन्द्रशर्मा इन्द्रभूमिः इन्द्रघोष इन्द्ररात इन्द्रविष्णुः इन्द्रदेव इन्द्रज्योतिः इन्द्रयशा इत्यादि कुलभेदेनोपपन्नं भवति ॥ २.३४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In the fourth month*’—from birth—‘*should be performed the ceremony of
the child’s egress*’—being taken out of the room and shown the sun. This
implies that for three months the child should he kept in the lying-in
room itself.

The common name ‘*child*’ is used, with a view to include the *śūdra*
also.

Similarly ‘*in the sixth month*,’ the ceremony of First Feeding on
grains. For five months the child should he kept purely on milk.

‘*Or, whatever might be regarded as auspicious*’—conducive to
welfare—‘*in the family*’ of the child; such well-known rites, for
instance, as making offerings to *Pūṭanā*, to *Śakunika*, to certain
trees, etc., etc. This may he done at specified times.

This last clause is meant to apply to all ceremonies; so that the
*naming* also may he done according to family custom, even though it be
not in strict conformity with the rules laid down above. Hence with
different families, such names become possible as—‘*Indrasvāmī*,’
‘*Indraśarman*’ ‘*Indrabhūti*,’ ‘*Indrarāta*,’ *Indraviṣṇu*,’
‘*Indradeva*,’ ‘*Indrajyotiṣ*,’ ‘*Indrayaśaṣ*,’ and so forth.—(34)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Yadveṣṭam maṅgalam kule*’—Medhātithi, along with Govindarāja and
Kullūka, takes this as applicable to all the sacraments.—‘*Kula*’ is
*family*, not *tribe*.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p.
442), and the second half in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 360) and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 267), which latter remarks that this
option regarding family-custom applies only to the sacrament of the
First Feeding. *The* verse is quoted in

*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, pp. 55 and 57), which adds that the ‘*Gṛha*,’
‘house,’ means the one in which birth has taken place;—in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 218);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 366).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu*, 1.1.5.—‘In the fourth month, showing of the Sun; and in the
sixth the feeding on grains.’

*Yājñavalkva*, 1.12.—‘During the fourth month the Going Out; during the
sixth the feeding on grains.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.16.1.—‘During the sixth month, feeding on
grains.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.17.19-5.1.—‘The rite of Going Out during the
fourth month, and the feeding on grains during the sixth month.’

*Bhaviṣya-Burāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘On the twelfth day
the taking out of the baby from the house.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘The Going Out on the
twelfth day, during the third month.’

*Laugākṣi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘The showing of the Sun
during the third fortnight; and the feeding on grains, during the sixth
month, on the cutting of teeth’ (p. 267).

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘During the third month should
be done the showing of the Sun, and the showing of the Moon during the
fourth month; the Going Out during the fourth month.’

\[The several texts prescribing the third and the fourth month for this
Rite are to be reconciled as referring respectively to the showing of
the Sun and the showing of the Moon.\]

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 267).—‘The feeding on grains should
be done during the sixth or eighth month.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘The Going Out of the
baby should be performed during the fourth month, and during the sixth
month it may be carried to the temples of gods.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 267).—‘The feeding on grains is
to be done during the sixth month, or during the even months
succeeding.’

*Śaunaka* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 250).—‘During the fourth or the
sixth month is to be performed the Going Out of the baby by the father
or guardian.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 267).—‘The best time for the
feeding on grains is during the sixth solar month; if it is not done
during that month, it should be done during either the eighth or the
ninth or the tenth or the twelfth month.’ \[The *ninth* month is
prescribed with special reference to girls.\]

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 269).—‘The first feeding on grains
should be for males during the sixth month and for females, during the
fifth or seventh month; or during the eighth, ninth or tenth month.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 268).—‘The feeding on
grains on the lapse of a year.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 268).—‘Feeding on grains after one year; or after
half-year, say some.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 26S).—‘The feeding on grains is to be done
after the 150th and before the 180th day.’

\[Of the various alternatives laid down, one should adopt that which is
in accordance with the practice in his family.\]

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 268).—‘The feeding on grains of
male babies should be done during the even months, and that of female
babies during the odd months.’

As regards the food to be given, says Āśvalāyana
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 276).—‘During the sixth month one should
feed the baby with grains mixed with goat-meat, or partridge-meat, or
rice mixed with butter, or rice mixed with curd, or rice mixed with
honey, or grains mixed with curd and butter.’

*Śāṅkhāyaua-Gṛhyasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 277).—‘The first
feeding during the sixth month, with goat-meat or partridge-meat or fish
or butter-rice or rice mixed with curd, honey and butter.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 275).—‘The child should be fed
on rice cooked in milk.’

*Purāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 25).—‘During the fourth month, the child shall be
shown the moon; O King, the taking out of the house should be done on
the twelfth day; such is the opinion of some people.’

*Lokāksi* (? Laugākṣi; Parāśaramādhava, p. 442).—‘Showing of the sun
during the third fortnight.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

034	In the fourth month the Nishkramana (the first leaving of the house) of the child should be performed, in the sixth month the Annaprasana (first feeding with rice), and optionally (any other) auspicious ceremony required by (the custom of) the family.
</details>
