+++
title = "035 चूडाकर्म द्विजातीनाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In view or the injunctions or the Veda, the Tonsure-ceremony of all twice-born children should be performed, according to law, in the first year or the third.—(35)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चूडा** शिखा । तदर्थं कर्म **चूडाकर्म** । केषुचिन् मूर्द्धदेशेषु केशानां स्थापनां रचनाविशेषश् चैतच् चूडाकर्मोच्यते । **प्रथमवर्षे तृतीये वा** । ग्रहसौस्थित्या[^१६६] विकल्पः । **श्रुतिनोदनाद्** इत्य् अनुवादस् तन्मूलतयैव प्रामाण्यस्योक्तत्वात् । अथ वा श्रुतिशब्देन न विधायकान्य् एव वाक्यान्य् उच्यन्ते । किं तर्हि, मन्त्राः । ते च चूडाकर्म "याञ् जनाः"[^१६७] (पार्ग् ३.२.२) इतिवद् अदृष्टं प्रकाशयन्ति- "यत् क्षुरेण मार्जयेत" (पार्ग् २.१.१९) इत्यादि तेन समन्त्रकम् एतत् कर्मेत्य् उक्तं भवति । विशेषापेक्षायां गार्ह्यो विधिर् अङ्गीक्रियते । अतः शूद्रस्य नायं संस्कारः, द्विजातिग्रहणाच् च । अनियतकालं तु केशवपनं शूद्रस्यार्थप्राप्तं न निवार्यते ॥ २.३५ ॥


[^१६७]:
     M G: cūḍākarmavyañjanā


[^१६६]:
     J: -sausthiyāpekṣā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Cūḍā*’ is the tuft of hair on the crown of the bead’; and the ceremony
for the purpose of this is called ‘**Cū*ḍākarman*,’ ‘*Tonsure*’; this
name ‘Tonsure’ is given to that ceremony which consists in the cutting
of the hair in such a manner as to leave well-arranged tufts of hair on
certain parts of the head.

This may be done ‘*in the first year or the third*’;—this option being
due to considerations of the good and evil aspects of planets.

‘*In view of the injunctions of the Veda*’:—this is merely explanatory:
the fact of the entire contents of the work being based upon the Veda
having been already stated before. Or, the term may he taken here as not
necessarily standing for the injunctive texts, but including the Mantras
also; and as a matter of fact, we have the *mantra*, ‘*yatkṣureṇa
mārjayet, etc*.,’ (*Pāraskara-gṛhyasūtra*, 2.1.1), which is indicative
of the Tonsure-ceremony, in the same manner as the *Mantra* ‘*yāñjanā
pratinandanti, etc*.,’ (*Pāraskara*,—3.2.2) indicates the
*Aṣṭakā-rites*. So that what the phrase means is that the ceremony
should be performed with *mantras*. As to the particular details
(regarding the *mantras*, etc.), these are learnt from the *Gṛyhasūtra*.

From this it follows that this sacrament is not to he done for the
*Śūdra*; which is also clear from the mention of the ‘*twice-born*.’ As
for the *shaving of hair* without any restriction as to time, this is
done for special purposes, and may he done for the Śūdra also: this is
not interdicted.—(35)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dharmataḥ*’—‘according to Law’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘for the sake
of spiritual merit’ (Kullūka).

This verse has been quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Saṃskāra, p. 605) for
the purpose of showing that even a boy who has not cut his teeth can be
‘one who has had Ids Tonsure performed.’

It is quoted in *Smṛti-tattva* (p. 653)—which points out that the time
most suited for the ceremony is the *third*, not the *first* year and it
bases this on the distinct declaration by Śaṅkha that—‘for the rite of
Tonsure, the third year is what has been accepted by all the
Gṛhyasūtras.’ It also quotes it on p. 922, with a view to show that the
time for the ceremony is not fixed, there being an option as to its
being done in the first, third, or even the fifth year.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 296), where it is
explained that the presence of the particle ‘vā,’ ‘or’, implies that the
rite may be performed in the *second* year also; this latter is also
sanctioned by a text from Yama.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 34) also quotes it without adding any explanatory
notes.—It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 58);—in *Hemādri*
(Pariśeṣa, p. 742);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (pp. 29 and 128), which quotes
Medhātithi to the effect that the term ‘*dvijātīnām*’ indicates that
this rite is not to be performed for the Shudra.;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 36c); and in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 219).

Medhātithi has described this ceremony as that ‘which consists in the
cutting of the hair in such a manner as to leave well-arranged tufts of
hair on certain parts of the head.’

Further details have heen supplied in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 361), which
quotes *Lokākṣi* (called Laugākṣi in *Smṛtitattva*, p. 653) describing
the ‘**Cū*ḍā*’as ‘a line of hair, towards the right among the
*Vaśiṣṭhas*, on both sides among the *Airis* and *Kāśyapas*, and in five
places among the *Āṅgirasas*; some people keep a single line; others
only the top-tuft, shaped like the leaf of the banyan tree—and adds that
the exact form is to be determined by the *Gṛhyasūtra, of the man
concerned*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu*, 27.12.—‘Tonsure is performed in the third year.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.12.—‘Tonsure is to be performed according to
family-custom.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.17.1.—‘Tonsure in the third year; or in
accordance with the custom of the family.’

*Pāraskara- Gṛhyasūtrā*, 2.1.2.—‘The performance of Ton-sure for the
one-year-old child: or during the third year.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.9.1.—‘The performance of Tonsure in the third
year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 296).—‘The performance of Tonsure
has been prescribed for all castes; by Tonsure is the life-span
enhanced, by Tonsure is it reduced. It should be performed during the
third or the fifth year, or according to the practice obtaining in the
family. It may be performed also during the seventh year from either
birth or the taking of the Fires.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 996).—‘Before the completion of the
year, Tonsure should be performed; or during the second or the third
year.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 297).—‘Tonsure is recommended
during the third or the fifth year; or even earlier, but during the odd
year, or during the sixth year; or along with the Upanayana.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 296).—‘Counting either from
conception or from Birth,—during the fifth or the seventh year should be
performed for the male as well as the female child.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 996).—‘The learned recommend the
third vear from Birth as the best; the fifth and the seventh years from
Birth are to be regarded as mediocre and the worst time would he the
tenth or the eleventh year from Birth.—The Tonsure of children should he
performed either, before the end of the first year, or in the third or
fifth year, or according to the family-custom.’

*Atri* (Do., p. 298).—‘Tonsure during the third year is conducive to the
fulfilment of all desires; that during the first year is conducive to
longevity and Brāhmic glory; that during the fifth year leads to the
acquisition of cattle; during the even years, it is to be deprecated.’

*Nṛsiṃha* (Do.).—‘Tonsure is to be performed during either the first or
the third or the fifth year; after the lapse of the third part of the
year.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 299).—‘Tonsure should be performed during the third
year, after the lapse of its third part.’

\[The upshot of the whole is that Tonsure may he performed during any of
the following years—1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th, 11th,—or on the
Upanayana-day;—or according to the custom prevailing in the family.\]

\[The form in which the Tonsure is to be performed, the shape that is to
be given to the hair on the head, the keeping of the *Śikhā*,—all this
is described in detail in the Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 315.\]

*Baijavāpa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 413).—‘Tonsure during the third year.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Tonsure during the third or the fifth vear.’

*Śaunaka* (Do.).—‘Tonsure during the third year, or according to the
family-custom.’

*Lokākṣi* (Do.).—‘For those belonging to the Vaśiṣṭha Gotra, the tuft is
towards the right, for those of Atri or Kāś-yapa, on both sides; for
those of Bhṛgu, it should be all shaven; for those of Aṅgiras, there are
five tufts; others have the tuft in the form of a semi-circle.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 29).—‘Tonsure during the third or the
fifth year.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—\[Lays down the auspicious days, etc.\]
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

035	According to the teaching of the revealed texts, the Kudakarman (tonsure) must be performed, for the sake of spiritual merit, by all twice-born men in the first or third year.
</details>
