+++
title = "036 गर्भाष्टमे ऽब्दे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the eighth year from conception one should perform the initiation of the Brāhmaṇa; of the king in the eleventh year from conception; and of the Vaiśya in the twelfth.—(36)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गर्भस्थस्य यः संवत्सरस् तत आरभ्यते यो ऽष्टमो ऽब्दः । गर्भशब्देन[^१६८] साहचर्यात् संवत्सरो लक्ष्यते । न हि मुख्यया वृत्त्या गर्भस्य संवत्सरो ऽष्टम इति व्यपदेशं लभते । तस्मिन्न् **औपनायनं ब्राह्मणस्य कुर्वीत** । उपनयनम् एवौपनायनं स्वार्थिको ऽण् । "अन्येषाम् अपि दृश्यते" (पाण् ६.३.१८७) इत्य् उत्तर्पदस्य दीर्घः । छान्दसत्वाद् वोभयपदवृद्धिः । उपनयनम् इति हि एष संस्कारो वेदविदां गृह्यस्मृतिषु प्रसिद्धो माउज्ञीबन्धनापरपर्यायः । उपनीयते समीपं प्राप्यते येनाचार्यस्य स्वाध्यायाध्ययनार्थं कुड्यं कटं वा कर्तुं तद् उपनयनम् । विशिष्टस्य संस्कारकर्मणो नामधेयम् एतत् । 


[^१६८]:
     M G: garbhaśabde

- **गर्भाद् एकादशे राज्ञः** । गर्भात् प्रभृति गर्भाद् वा परो य एकादशो ऽब्दस् तत्र क्षत्रियस्य कर्तव्यम् । राजशब्दो ऽयं क्षत्रियजातिवचनो नाभिषेकादिगुणयोगम् अपेक्षते ग्रन्थेषु तथा प्रयोगदर्शनात्, ब्राह्मणादिजातिशब्दसाहचर्याच् च । गुणविधिषु च क्षत्रियशब्ददर्शनात् "क्षत्रियस्य तु मौर्वी" (म्ध् २.४२) इति । यस् तु राजशब्दस्य क्षत्रियाद् अन्यत्र जनपदेश्वरे वैश्यादौ प्रयोगः स गौण इति वक्ष्यामः । मुख्ये चासति गौणस्य ग्रहणम् । तथा च गृह्यकारः- "अष्टमे वर्षे ब्राह्मणम् उपनयेद् एकादशे क्षत्रियं द्वादशे वैश्यम्" (आश्ग् १.१७.१–४) इति । भगवांश् च पाणिनिः एवम् एव प्रतिपन्नो राज्ञः कर्म राज्यम् इति राज्यशब्दस्य राजशब्दं प्रति प्रकृतित्वं ब्रुवन्न् एव जनपदैश्वर्येण राजशब्दार्थप्रसिद्धिम् आह । एवं **गर्भात् तु द्वादशे** ऽब्दे **विशः** वैश्यस्य ॥ २.३६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Counting from the year that one spends in the mother’s womb, when the
child reaches the eighth year;—the term ‘*garbha*’ stands for the *year*
spent in the womb; this indication being due to the presence of the term
‘year,’ ‘*abda*’; certainly the ‘year’ could never be the ‘eighth’ from
‘*garbha*,’ if this latter were taken in its direct sense;—in this year
*one should perform the Initiation of the Brāhmaṇa*.

The term ‘*aupanāyanam*’ stands for ‘*upamyanam*,’ the ‘*aṇ*’ affix
having the reflexive sense; and the lengthening of the vowel in the
latter term (‘*nayanam*’) being in accordance with (*Pāṇini* 6.3.198);
or the lengthening of the vowels of both terms (‘*upa*’ and ‘*nayanam*’)
may be regarded as a Vedic anomaly.

‘*Upanayana*,’ ‘Initiation,’ is the name of a sacrament described in the
*Gṛhyasūtras* and well-known to Vedic scholars, its other name is
‘*Mauñjī-bandha*,’ ‘*Girdle-Investiture*.’ That ceremony in which the
child is taken over to—made over to—(*upanīyate*)—the teacher, for the
purposes of teaching—and not for any such other purpose as the building
of a Avail, or the making of a mat—is what is called ‘*Upanayana*.’ It
is the name of a particular sacramental rite.

‘*Of the King in the eleventh year from conception*’;—for the
*Kṣatṭriya* the ceremony should be performed in the eleventh year ‘*from
conception*,’—*i.e*., ‘*beginning* *from* conception,’ or ‘*after*
conception.’

The term ‘king’ ‘*rājan*’ (in ‘*rājñaḥ*’) should he taken as standing
for the Kṣatriya caste; and does not necessarily mean one who is a duly
anointed king; firstly because such is the sense in which the word is
generally used in books; secondly because in the present context it
occurs along with the terms ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ and the rest (which are all
denotative of *castes*); and thirdly because we find the term
‘*Kṣatriya*’ used in the rules that follow regarding the details of the
ceremony; *e.g*., it is raid that ‘the girdle of the Kṣatriya should
consist of the bow-string’ (below, Verse 12). It is true that the term
‘king’ is sometimes used in the sense of the ‘rulers’ of ‘countries,’
and as such applied to *Vaiśyas* and other castes also; but such usage
is purely figurative and indirect. And the figurative meaning of a word
can be accepted only when the original direct meaning is found
inapplicable. That the term ‘king’ in the text stands for the *Kṣatriya*
is shown by the following words of the author of the *Gṛhya-sutra*—‘One
should initiate the Brāhmaṇa in the eighth year, the *Kṣatriya* in the
eleventh and the Vaiśya in the twefth.’ It is on this understanding that
the revered Pāṇini derives the word ‘*rājya*’ (‘Kingship’) from the word
‘*rājan*’ (King), explaining it as ‘the function the King,’ and hence
used in the ordinary sense of ‘lord of country’ \[ *i.e*., the ‘function
of ruling a country’ really belongs to the Kṣatriya caste, and when
persons of other castes arc called ‘King’ their title is based upon
their doing ‘the work of the King’\].

*Of the Vaiśya, the ceremony should be performed in the twelfth year
from conception*.—(86)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Pariśeṣa, p. 745);—in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 220), which explains that “*Upanayana*
is to be derived as ‘*Nayanam evanāyanam*’ and then the prefix ‘*Upa*’
added;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 32);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 68), which adds that in the case of the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya also
the years are to be counted from the one spent in the womb.

It has been quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 17); and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 446).

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 344) explains the reason for the eighth,
eleventh and twelfth years being regarded as the best for the Brāhmaṇa,
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya respectively. The Gāyatrī mantra is sacred
for the Brāhmaṇa and its foot contains eight syllables; the Triṣtup for
the Kṣatriya contains a foot of eleven syllables, and the Jagati for the
Vaiśya has a foot of twelve syllables.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1-7, 8, 13.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Upanayana
daring the eighth year;—for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, during the
eleventh and twelfth years, respectively.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 32).—‘*Initiation* during the eighth, fifth or
ninth year; the eighth year from conception is the time fixed for all,
the ninth or the fifth only for those with distinct motives.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2.8-10.—‘The years in this connection being
computed from conception,—the Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
performed during the eighth year;—three years after the eighth, of the
Kṣatriya;—and after one more year, of the Vaiśya.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.44.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be done
during the eighth year from conception, of the Kṣatriya during the
eleventh year from conception, and of the Vaiśya during the twelfth year
from conception.’ *Viṣṇu*, 27.15-17.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa
during the eighth year from conception; of the Kṣatriya during the
eleventh year from conception; of the Vaiśnava during the twelfth year
from conception.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.14.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana?s?? be performed either
during the eighth year from conception, or during the eighth year (from
birth); the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during the
twelfth year; according to some, it is to be done in accordance with the
practice prevailing in the family.’

*Āśvalāyana* - *Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.19.1-4.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s, Upanayana should
be done during the eighth year, or during the eighth year from
conception; the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during
the twelfth year.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1-2.1-3.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana should be
performed during the eighth vear, or during the eighth year from
conception; the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during
the twelfth year.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.10.1-3.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
done during the eighth year from conception; of the Kṣatriya, during the
eleventh year; of the Vaiśya, during the twelfth year.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.19.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
done during the spring, of the Kṣatriya during the summer, and of the
Vaiśya, during the autumn. Of the Brāhmaṇa during the eighth year from
conception, of the Kṣatriya, during the twelfth year from conception.’

*Śruti* (Vīramitrodaya, Saṃskāra, p. 339).—‘The Upanayana of the
Brāhmaṇa should he performed when he is eight years old.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Do., p. 340).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should acquire the
‘twice-born’ state during the eighth year from conception, or during the
eighth, or the tenth year; the Kṣatriya during the eleventh year: and
the Vaiśya during the twelfth year.

*Nārada* (Do., p. 31-1).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Upanayana should be
performed during the eighth year, either from conception or from birth;
for Kṣatriyas, during the eleventh year, and for Vaiśyas during the
twelfth year.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do., p. 310).—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should he
performed during the fifth year from conception or during the eighth
year from conception; of the Kṣatriya during the eleventh year from
conception; of the Vaiśya, during the twelfth year.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 311'.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana during the seventh
year; of the Kṣatriya during the ninth year, and of the Vaiśya, during
the eleventh year.’

*Budha* (Aparārka, p. 31).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should get himself initiated in
his eighth year from conception, during the spring.'

*Shannaka* (Do.).—‘One should initiate the Brāhmaṇa in his eighth year,
or in his eighth year from conception; the Kṣattnya in the eleventh and
the Vaiśya in the twelfth year.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

036	In the eighth year after conception, one should perform the initiation (upanayana) of a Brahmana, in the eleventh after conception (that) of a Kshatriya, but in the twelfth that of a Vaisya.
</details>
