+++
title = "037 ब्रह्मवर्चस-कामस्य कार्यो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the Brāhmaṇa desirous of Brahmic glory, it should be done in the fifth year; for the ‘King’ desirous of power, in the sixth; and for the Vaiśya desirous of business, in the eighth.—(37)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पितृधर्मेणापत्यं व्यादिशति "ब्रह्मवर्चसी मे पुत्रः स्यात्" इति पितृकामनया पुत्रो व्यपदिष्टस् तत्कामस्येति । पुत्रस्य बालत्वान् नैवंविधा कामना संभवति ।

- <u>ननु</u> चैवम् अन्यकृतात् कर्मण अन्यस्य फले ऽभ्युपगम्यमाने ऽकृताभ्यागमदोषापत्तिः । अकाम्यमानं च फलं भवत्य् एतद् अप्य् उत्क्रान्तशब्दप्रमाणन्यायमर्यादयोच्यते । 

- <u>नैष दोषः</u> । स्येनवद् एतद् भविष्यति । श्येनम् अभिचरन् करोत्य् अभिचर्यमाणश् च म्रियते । अथोच्यते कामिन एवैतत् फलम् । शत्रुमरणं हि यजमानः कामयते । तद् एव प्राप्नोतीति नाकर्तृगामिता फलस्य । अत्रापि विशिष्टपुत्रवत्तालक्षणम् उपनेतुर् एव फलम् । यथा पुत्रस्यारोग्येण पितुः प्रीतिः, एवं ब्रह्मवर्चसेनाप्य् अतो ऽधिकृतस्य कर्तुश् च तत्फलम् अन्वयानुसारी हि शास्त्रार्थावसायः । इह च पुत्रस्य फलकामेनैवं कर्तव्यम् इत्य् अन्वयः प्रतीयते । न च यथाश्रुतान्वयत्यागे[^१६९] किंचन प्रमाणम् अस्ति । एतेन पितुर् और्धव्देहिकः पुत्रकृत उपकारो व्याख्यातः । तत्रापि हि पुत्रः कर्ता पितृतृप्तिश् च फलम् । तथा च लिङ्गं "अत्मा वै पुत्रनामासि" (पार्ग् १.१६.१८) इति । पित्रैव हि तावच् छ्राद्धम् आत्मसंप्रदानकं वस्तुतः कृतम् एव येनापत्योत्पादनम् एवमर्थम् एव कृतम् । यथा सर्वस्वारे मृतस्यार्भकावमानात् ये पराञ्चः पदार्थास् तेष्व् अपि यजमानस्यैव कर्तृत्वम् । "ब्राह्मणाह् संस्थापयत यज्ञम्" इत् प्रैषेण, दक्षिणाभिर् वरणेन वा प्रयोगसमाप्ताव् ऋत्विजां विनियोक्तृत्वात्, एवम् इहापि तादर्थ्येन पुत्रस्योत्पादनात्, यच् छ्राद्धादिकं पित्रर्थं क्रियते पित्रैव तत्कृतं भवति । अध्ययनविज्ञानसंपन्नं **ब्रह्मवर्चसम्** ।


[^१६९]:
     M G 1st ed.: yathāśrutānavāparo

- **बलं** सामर्थ्यम् आभ्यन्तरं ब्राह्मं च । उत्साहशक्तिर् महाप्राणता चेत्य् एतद्[^१७०] आभ्यन्तरम्, बाह्यं च हस्त्यश्वरथपदातिकोशसंपत् । तद् उक्तम्- "स्वाङ्गाभ्युच्चयं सांयौगिकानां चार्थानाम्" (निर् १.२) इति । 


[^१७०]:
     M G: -prāṇatā cetad

- **ईहा** चेष्टा । बहुना धनेन कृषिवाणिज्यादिव्यवहारः । 

- सर्वत्र गर्भादिसंख्या च[^१७१] वर्षाणाम्, **गर्भाद्** इति ह्य् अनुवर्तते ॥ २.३७ ॥


[^१७१]:
     J omits: ca
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What belongs to the father is here attributed to the child; the
desire—‘May my sou attain Brahmic glory!’—resides in the father; and
this desire being attributed to the child, the latter is spoken of as
‘desirous of Brahmic glory.’ The child itself is too youug to have the
said desire.

“In that case the action done by one person would have its result
accruing to a totally different person; and this would involve the
absurdity of a man acquiring what he has not earned. And the assertion
that the result accrues to the child without his desiring it is one that
is contrary to all reason and scriptural authority.”

There is no force in the objection. The case in question is analogous to
that of the *Śyena* sacrifice: the *Śyena* is performed by a man seekiug
to encompass death, and this death falls upon the person against whom
the performance is aimed (and not on the performer himself). It might be
argued that—“in this case the result actually accrues to the person
seekiug for it; it is the sacrificer who desires the death of his enemy;
and it is he who obtains this result; so that the result of the act does
not accrue to a person that did not perform it.”—But in the present case
also, the result, in the shape of ‘having a child with the particular
qualification,’ accrues to the performer of the Initiation (the father);
just as the good health of the child brings pleasure to the father, so
also the Brahmic glory of the son would be a source of pleasure to the
father; so that the result here also would accrue to the performer, who
had sought for it. Further, it is only from the construction of the
actual words used that we can ascertain the meaning of the scriptural
texts; and in the present context, the only construction found possible
is that the father should perform the ceremony with the desire of a
certain result to accrue to his son; and there are no grounds for
abandoning this natural construction of the words.

This same explanation applies also to the case of the benefits of the
after-death rites accruing to the father (even though performed by the
son); as in that case also the performer is the son, and the result is
the satisfaction of the father. Further, we have the text—‘Thou art my
very self called the. *non*’—which shows that when the after-death rites
are performed by the *son*, it is the father himself (iṇ the shape of
the son) that makes the offerings to himself; specially as it was with a
view to this alone that the father begot the son.

Then again, in the *Sarvasvāra* sacrifice (which is performed by one who
wishes to bring about his own death and translation to heaven),—even
after the sacrificer himself has died, the subsequent details have got
to he performed: and in this performance also the same sacrificer is
regarded as the ‘performer,’ in view of the direction that he has given
fo the Brāhmaṇas—‘O brāhmaṇas, please complete this sacrifice,’—as also
of the sacrificial gifts and appointments made by him; by virtue of
which the said sacrificer is regarded as the actual instigator or
employer of the officiating priests. In the same manner, in the case in
question also, in as much as the son was begotten for the purpose of
performing the funeral rites, these rites, though performed (by the son)
for the sake of the father, are regarded as performed by the father
himself.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Medhātithi (p. 90, 1. 15)—‘*Sarvasvāre*’—See Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 10.2.56-57.
At the Sarvasvāra sacrifice the sacrificer recites the Ārbhaya hymn just
before he enters the fire for self-immolation,

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 27) as laying down the time for
the performance of the Upanayaṇa with special ends in view.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446), which quotes
Āpastamba as connecting The seventh year with ‘Brāhmic glory,’ the
eighth with ‘longevity,’ the ninth with ‘splendour,’ the tenth with
‘food’, the eleventh with ‘efficiency of organs,’ and the twelfth with
‘cattle’.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 17) quotes it mentioning the said assertions.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Pariśeṣa, p. 748);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
12), as mentioning special results to be achieved;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 41 b); and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 68).

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 345) quotes it as describing the *Kāmya*
options.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 184) quotes it without comment.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.7-8.—‘When special results are desired, during
the ninth or the fifth year.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.21-26.—‘During the seventh year, if Brāhmic
glory is desired for the boy; during the eighth year, if longevity is
desired; during the ninth year, if brilliance is desired; during the
tenth year, if possession of much food is desired; during the eleventh
year, if efficiency of sense-organs is desired; during the twelfth year,
if possession of cattle is desired.’

*Uśanas* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 315).—‘The Upanayana of the
Brāhmaṇa should be done during the fifth year from birth, of the
Kṣatriya during the sixth, and of the Vaiśya during the seventh year,—if
strength is desired.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīra-Saṃskara, p. 345).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa if Brāhmic glory
is desired, his Upanayana should be performed during the eighth year
(either from conception or from birth); if food is desired, during the
ninth year; if intelligence is desired, during the tenth year: if
possession of jewels is desired, during the eleventh year; if bodily
stoutness is desired, during the twelfth year.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do., p. 346).—‘For the Kṣatriya desiring prosperity or
strength, it should be performed during the sixth or the twelfth year,
respectively; for the Vaiśya desiring success in agriculture or
longevity, it should be performed during the eighth or fourth year,
respectively.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do., p. 346).—‘During the seventh year, if Brāhmic glory
is desired; during the eighth, if longevity is desired; during the
ninth, if brilliance is desired; during the tenth, if food is desired;
during the eleventh, if efficient sense-organs are desired; during the
twelfth, if cattle is desired; during the thirteenth, if intelligence is
desired; during the fourteenth, if stoutness is desired; during the
fifteenth, if the birth of a brother’s son is desired; and during the
sixteenth, if all desirable things are desired.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

037	(The initiation) of a Brahmana who desires proficiency in sacred learning should take place in the fifth (year after conception), (that) of a Kshatriya who wishes to become powerful in the sixth, (and that) of a Vaisya who longs for (success in his) business in the eighth.
</details>
