+++
title = "038 आ षोदशाद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the Brāhmaṇa the Sāvitrī does not lapse till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya till the twenty-second year; and for the Vaiśya till the twenty-fourth year.—(38)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एवं तावन् मुख्यकाम्याव् उपनयनकालाव् उक्तौ । इदानीं पितुर् अभावे व्याध्यादिना वा कथंचिद् अनुपनीते माणवके कालातिपत्ताव् अनुपनेयता प्राप्ता, सत्य् अपि कालस्याङ्गत्वे तदभावे ऽधिकारनिवृत्तेः,[^१७२] यथा सायंप्रातःकालातिपत्ताव् अग्निहोत्रस्याकरणे । अतो विहितकालव्यतिरेकेण प्रतिप्रसवार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते । **यावत् ष्ōडशं** वर्षं गर्भाद् आरभ्य तावद् ब्राह्मणस्योपनयनर्हता न निवर्तते । सावित्रीशब्देन तदनुवचनसाधनम् उपनयनाख्यं कर्म लक्ष्यते । **नातिवर्तते** नातिक्रान्तकालं भवतीत्य् अर्थः । 


[^१७२]:
     M G: -nivṛtte

- एवम् **आ द्वाविंशात् क्षत्रबन्धोः** क्षत्रियजातीयस्येत्य् अर्थः । बन्धुशब्दो ऽयं क्वचित् कुत्सायां प्रवर्तते । यत् स्वं कथं वेत्स[^१७३] ब्रह्मबन्ध[^१७४] इति । ज्ञातिवचनः यथा,


[^१७४]:
     M G: -bandhāv; J: -bandhav; this is probably a vocative: brahmabandho


[^१७३]:
     M G: ceccha

- ग्रामता जनता चैव बन्धुता च सहायता ।

- महेन्द्रस्याप्य् अगम्यासौ भूमिभागभुजां कुतः ॥

द्रव्यवचनो "जात्यन्ताच्छ बन्धुनि" इति (पान् ५.४.९) । तत्र पूर्वयोर् अर्थयोर् असंभवात् तृतीयो ऽर्थो गृह्यते । द्वाविंशतेः पूरणो द्वाविंशो ऽब्दः तद्धितार्थः । 

- **आ चतुर्विंशतेर् विशः** । प्राप्तो ऽप्य् अत्र पूरणप्रत्ययो वृत्तानुरोधान् न कृतः, प्रतीयते तु तदर्थः । न हि सुमुदायविषयायाश् चतुर्विंशतिसंख्याया अवधित्वेन संभवः । तदवयवस् तु चतुर्विंशो भवति संवत्सरो ऽवधिः । आङम् अभिविधौ व्याचक्षते । 

- लिङ्गदर्शनं चोदाहरन्ति । "गायत्र्या ब्राह्मणम् उपनयीत, त्रिष्टुभा राजन्यम्, जगत्या वैश्यम्" इति । एतेषां च छंदसाम् इयता कालेन द्वौ पादौ पूर्येते । तावन्तं कालं बलवन्ति न त्यजन्ति स्वाश्रयभूतान् वर्णान् । तृतीये तु पादे ऽपक्रान्ते गतरसान्य् अतिवयांसि न्यूनसामर्थ्यानि भवन्ति समाप्तिम् उपयान्ति । यथा "पञ्चशता स्थविरो मनुष्यः" इति । अतश् च नैतेन वयम् उपासितानीति त्यजन्ति तं वर्णम् । ततो "न गायत्रो ब्राह्मणो, न त्रैष्टुभो राजन्यो, न जागतो वैश्यः" इति । सविता देवता यस्या ऋचः सा सवित्रीः; सा च गायत्री द्रष्टव्या प्रदर्शिता, गृह्याच् च । एवं क्षत्रियस्य त्रिष्टुप् सावित्री "आकृष्णेन" (र्व् १.३५.२) इति । वैश्यस्य जगती "विश्वा रूपाणि" (र्व् ५.८१.२) इति ॥ २.३८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For the Initiatory Rite, the principal as well as the optional time have
been prescribed. From this it would seem that if, on account of the
death of the father, or by reason of illness and such other causes, the
boy remains uninitiated and the prescribed time has gone by,—he becomes
unfit, for initiation; this idea being countenanced by the faot that,
even though the prescribed time is a secondary factor in the rite, yet
on the lapse of that time, the performer’s title to the performance
ceases; just as we find in the case of omission of the *Agnihotra*
-offerings after the prescribed morning and evening have gone by. It is
with a view to this that the present verse propounds an exception to the
general rule, and lays down the necessity of performing the rite even
after the passing off of the prescribed time.

Till the end of the sixteenth year after conception, the Brāhmaṇa’s
title to the Initiatory Bite does not cease. The term ‘*Sāvitrī*’ in the
text stands for the ‘Rite of Initiation,’ which is the means whereby the
teaching of the is accomplished. ‘*Does not lapse,’ i.e*., does not
become out of date.

Similarly ‘*for the Kṣatriya till the twenty-second year*,’—*i.e*., for
the person belonging to the Kṣatriya *caste*. Tho term ‘*bandhu*’ is
used (*a*) sometimes in a deprecatory sense; *e.g*., in such passages
as—‘how doth thou know this. O Brahma-bandhu! (wretched
Brāhmaṇa)?’;—(*b*) sometimes it is used in the sense of ‘*family*’;
*e.g*., in the passage—‘the possession of a number of villages, the
presence of a large following, extensive family-connections (), and
alliances,—these are not to be trifled with even by Indra himself; what
to say of persons possessing only parts of the earth!’;—(*c*) in some
cases it also means ‘substance’; *e.g*., in Pāṇiṇi’s Sutra (5.4.9)—‘a
word ending with the term *jāṭi* takes the affix *ca*, when it denotes
*bandhu (i.e*., a substance belonging to a particular class).’ In the
present context the first two meanings of the term ‘*bandhu*’ being
inapplicable, we take it in the third sense.

The nominal affix (*ḍaṭ*) in the term ‘*dvāviṃśaḥ*’ means that which
completes the number twenty-two, *i.e*., the *twenty-second*.

‘*For the Vaiśya till the twenty-fourth year*’.—Here also though the
presence of the ‘*ḍaṭ*’-affix implying completion was necessary, yet it
has not been used in view of metrical contingencies; but the sense is
there all the same. That this must be so is proved by the fact that the
number ‘twenty-four,’ which denotes the entire lot of twenty-four years,
could never form the limit of anything; while tine ‘*twenty-fourth
year'* which is one part of the ‘*twenty-four*,’ can very well form the
limit.

People explain the particle ‘*ā*’ as denoting inclusion.

In support of what is said in this verse people cite the Vedic text—‘The
Brāhmaṇa should be initiated with the *Gāyatrī*, the Kṣatriya with the
and the Vaiśya with the *Jagatī*’ \[the *Gāyatrī* metre containing 24,
three times *eight*, the *Tṛṣtup* 33, three times *eleven*, and the
*Jagatī*, 48, four times *twelve*, syllables\]; the ages spoken of in
the text (16, 22 and 24) suffice to complete two quarters of each of the
three metres; up till then the metres retain their force and do ṇot
abandon the castes that form their receptacles; when however the third
quarter has passed, they lose their essence, become aged and having
their force reduced, they disappaer, just as the man becomes *old* at 50
(which represents two quarters of his life of 100 years). It is for this
reason that the said metres abandon their respective castes, when they
find that they have not been studied by them; and it is thus that (after
the said ages) the Brāhmaṇa ceases to be ‘related to the *Gāyatrī*,’ the
Kṣatriya ceases to be ‘related to the *Triṣṭup*’ and the Vaiśya ceases
to be ‘related to the *Jagatī*.’

‘*Sāvitrī*’—is the name of that verse which has for its deity; and that
such a verse is the *Gāyatrī* has been shown above, on the strength of
the *Gṛhyasūtras*.

For the Kṣatriya, the ‘*Sāvitrī*’ is the verse ‘*Ākṛṣṇena, etc*.’
(Ṛgveda, 1.35-2; Vājasaneya, 33.43), which is in the *Triṣṭup* metre;
and for the Vaiśya, it is the verse ‘*Viśvā rūpāṇi*, etc.’ Ṛgveda,
5.81.2; Vājasaneya, 12.3).—(38)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Burnell, in applying the name ‘vrātya’ to ‘Aryans not Brāhmanised,’
should have quoted his authorities.

Kullūka notes that some people have taken the particle ‘*ā*,’ ‘till,’ in
the sense of ‘until the beginning of’.

This verse has been quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 342), where
it is pointed out that the ‘sixteenth’ and other years mentioned here
should be counted ‘from conception,’ as in the case of the *eighth* and
others in verse 36. It points out that this verse lays down the many
secondary occasions for the performance of the ceremony.

This same work on p. 344, refers to the passage in Medhātithi, where a
Vedic text is quoted, which connects. the *Gāyatrī Triṣṭup* and *Jagati*
metres with the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya respectively; and
as under 36, so here also, it explains that the limits fixed in this
verse too are determined by the number of syllables in a foot of each of
the three metres mentioned. A foot of the *gāyatrī* has eight syllables;
so till the bṇy is sixteen years old, the Gāyatrī retains more than a
third of its force; and it is only when the boy has passed his sixteenth
year (corresponding to the sixteen syllables of the two feet of the
*Gāyatrī*) that the force of the mantra becomes weakened. Similarly
twenty two years correspond to the twenty-two syllables of the two feet
of the *Triṣṭup*, sacred for the Kṣatriya, and twenty four years
correspond to the twenty four syllables of the first two feet of the
*Jagati* metre, sacred for the *Vaiśya*.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446); and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 36) as the outside age-limit for *Upanayana*;—in
*Hemādri* (Pariśeṣa, p. 751), which adds that ‘*ā*’ here denotes
limit;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra. p. 41b);—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 72), as Laying down the secondary times for the
initiation.

*Vidhānapārijāta*, (p. 471) has quoted the verse as laying down the
secondary occasion for Upanayana;—so also *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 184).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verse 38-39)  
**

*Viṣṇu*, 1.27.26.—(Exactly the same words as in Manu.)

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.14.16.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Sāvitrī does not
lapse till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second
year; for the Vaiśya till two years longer.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.13.—‘There is no lapse for these till the
sixteenth, the twentv-second and the twenty-fourth year, respectively.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.1.27.—‘Till the sixteenth year there is no
lapse for the Brāhmaṇa; till the twenty-second, for the Kṣatriya; and
till the twenty-fourth, for the Vaiśya; till then they would be fit for
keeping the observances that we are going to describe.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.51.53.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not lapse
till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second year;
for the Vaiśya, till the twenty-fourth year.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.19.5-6.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not
lapse till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second
year; for the Vaiśya, till the twenty-fourth year; after this, they
become *lapsed from the Sāvitrī*.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.36-38.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not
become lapsed till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the
twenty-second and for the Vaiśya till the twenty-fourth year.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 3-12).—‘The twelfth, the
sixteenth and the twentieth years are the times not deprecated.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 342).—‘The time for Upanayana
extends up to the sixteenth, the twenty-second and the twenty-fourth
year, for the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, respectively.

*Yājñavalkya* 1.38 (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘After these years
all the three become fallen, excluded from all religious rites; and
become *apostates*, deprived of the Sāvitrī, until they perform the
Vrātyastoma.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteen years, twenty-two
years and twenty-four years constitute the time for Upanayana.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteen years have been
prescribed for the Brāhmaṇa, twenty-two years for the Kṣatriya and
twenty-four years for the Vaiśya.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saihskāra, p. 343).—‘He who has dropped the
Sāvitrī for fifteen years, should keep the observance after having
shaven his head along with the Śikhā.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘The apostates, fallen from
Sāvitrī, should be studiously shunned.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteenth is the
limit for Brāhmaṇas for securing the status of the twice-born;
twenty-second for Kṣatriyas; and twenty-fourth for Vaiśyas.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘After this, not
having acquired the status of the twice-born, they fall and become
apostates, excluded from Vedic rites.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 345).—The Brāhmaṇa who has passed
his sixteenth year, should not have his Upanayana performed; the
Kṣatriya after the twentieth year: and the Vaiśya after the twenty-fifth
year.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—(Has the same defìni-tion of
the ‘Apostate’ as Yājñavalkya.)

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—(Same as Manu, 39.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

038	The (time for the) Savitri (initiation) of a Brahmana does not pass until the completion of the sixteenth year (after conception), of a Kshatriya until the completion of the twenty-second, and of a Vaisya until the completion of the twenty-fourth.
</details>
