+++
title = "040 नैतैर् अपूतैर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa should not in ant case, even in times of distress, establish spiritual or uterine relationship with these persons, until they have been duly purified.—(40)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एतैर्** व्रात्यैर् **अपूतैर्** अकृतप्रायश्चित्तैर् **विधिवद्** यादृशो विधिः प्रायश्चित्ते[^१७६] शास्त्रेणोपदिष्टः तांश् चारयित्वा "त्रीन् कृच्छान्" इत्य् **आपद्य् अपि हि कर्हिचित्** कस्यांचिद् अप्य् आपदि न **संबन्धान् आचरेत्** कुर्यात् तैः **सह** । 


[^१७६]:
     G 1st ed.: prāyaścitta

- किं सर्वसंबन्धनिषेधः । नेत्य् आह- **ब्राह्मान् यौनांश् च** । ब्रह्म वेदः । तन्निमित्ताः संबन्धा याजनाध्यापनप्रतिग्रहाः[^१७७] । न ते याज्याः न याजकाः कर्तव्याः । एवं नाध्याप्या नैतेभ्यो ऽध्येतव्यम् । वेदार्थं विदुषः प्रतिग्रहाधिकाराद् एषो ऽपि ब्राह्मसंबन्धो भवति । यौनः संबन्धः कन्याया दानादाने । ब्राह्मणग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम् । अस्माच् च दोषदर्शनाद् व्रात्यतापरिहारार्थे पितुर् अभावे ऽपि व्युत्पन्नबुद्धिना माणवकेनाप्य् आत्मनात्मोपनाययितव्य इति प्रतीयते । काम्यो ह्य् अयम् आचार्यस्य विधिः । तत्राचार्यत्वम् अकामयमानो यदि कश्चिन् न पर्वर्तते तदा माणवकेन प्रार्थयितव्यो दक्षिणादिना[^१७८] । तथा च श्रुतिः- "सत्यकामो जाबालः हारिद्रुमतं[^१७९] गौतमम् इयाय ब्रह्मचर्यं भवति वक्ष्यामि" (छु ४.४.३) इति, स्वयम् आचार्यम् अभ्यर्थितवान् उपनयनार्थम् ॥ २.४० ॥


[^१७९]:
     M G 1st ed.: sahahāridrumaṃtaṃ; G 2nd ed.: hāridrumaṃtaṃ


[^१७८]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: kāmyo hy ayam . . . dakṣiṇādinā |


[^१७७]:
     M G give accusative plurals: -mittān saṃbandhān ...-pratigrahān
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*With these*’—Vrātyas;—‘*until purified*’—by expiatory rites;—‘*duly,’
i.e*., according to rules laid down in the scriptures laying down
expiatory rites; *e.g*., ‘making them undergo three *Kṛcchras, etc.,
etc*.;’—‘*even in times of distress*’—*i.e*., under no circumstances
however distressful;—‘*should not establish*,’ enter into,
‘*relationship*’ with them.

The question arising as to whether or not this prohibits all kinds of
relationship, the text supplies the answer in the negative—‘*spiritual
or* *uterine* .’

The term ‘*brāhma,’ ‘spirit*,’ here stands for the Veda; and it is
relationships through the Veda that are prohibited; such relationships
as officiating at sacrifices, teaching and accepting gifts; the meaning
being that one should neither officiate at their sacrificial
performances, nor appoint them to officiate at sacrifices, they should
not be taught, nor should one read with them. Since it is only one who
knows the meaning of the Veda that is entitled to accept gifts, the
accepting of gifts also becomes a ‘Vedic’ or ‘spiritual’ relationship.

‘*Uterine relationship*,’—the giving and taking of daughters in
marriage.

The specification of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ is intended to be illustrative
only.

The sense of all this is that, in view of the disqualification here
described, the boy whose father is no more should, if he is intelligent,
try to avoid the disqualification, by presenting himself (at the proper
time) for Initiation. To this end we have the *Śruti*—“Satyakāma Jābāla
went to Gautama Hāridrumata and said—‘I shall, sir, live with you as a
religious student”; where the boy himself requested the teacher to
inflate him. The initiating of boys is however entirely optional; so
that if the teacher should be found unwilling to take up the initiation,
be should be appealed to by the boy by means of presents, etc.—(40)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 144);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 73), which explains ‘*brahma-sambandha*’
as ‘teaching and so forth,’ and ‘*apūtaiḥ*’ as those who have not
performed the prescribed expiatory rites.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446);—and also in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 349), which explains the term ‘*apūtaiḥ*’
as ‘those who have not performed the prescribed expiatory rites;’ and
the ‘relationships’ referred are explained as standing for Initiation,
Reading, Teaching, Sacrificing and Receiving gifts.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 68) in support of the view that
dealings *are* permitted with such men as may have performed the
expiatory rites laid down for the omission of the sacraments;—it adds
that this is made clear by the epithet ‘*Apūtaiḥ*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.1.33; 1.2.6.—‘With these (apostates) one
should avoid association, dining and marriage; in the event of their
being desirous of expiating (the omission and the consequent apostacy),
they should keep, for twelve years, the observances relating to Vedic
studies, and then undergo the Upanayana, and be sprinkled with water
with Pāvamānī and other mantras.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.55.—‘They should not perform their Upanayana, nor
teach them, nor sacrifice for them, nor marry them.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasütra*, 1.19.7.—‘They should not perform their
Upanayana, nor teach them, nor sacrifice for them, nor have any dealings
with them.’ \[The Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 349, explains ‘dealings’ to
mean ‘marriage-connection.’\]

*Pāraskara* - *Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.40.—\[Exactly the same as above.\]

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.6.—‘They should not perform their Upanayana,
nor teach them, nor sacrifice for them, nor have marriage-relations with
them.’

*Baudhāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 348).—‘There are no rites
for the apostate until he passes through the Upanayana; so long as he is
not born in the Veda, he remains like a Śūdra.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smrti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 349).—‘No dealings—either
Vedic (tutorial), or marital or commercial,—should he ever held with
them by any cultured person who is true to his *dharma*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

040	With such men, if they have not been purified according to the rule, let no Brahmana ever, even in times of distress, form a connexion either through the Veda or by marriage.
</details>
