+++
title = "041 कार्ष्ण-रौरव-बास्तानि चर्माणि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Brahmacāris should wear the skin of the black (deer), of the Ruru deer and of the goat respectively; and also the cloth of hemp, flax and wool.’—(41)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कृष्णशब्दो यद्य् अपि कृष्णगुणयुक्तवस्तुमात्रे वर्तते "कृष्णा गौः, कृष्णः कम्बलः" इति, तथापीह स्मृत्यन्तराद् रौरवसाहचर्याच् च मृग एव प्रतीयते । **रुरुर्** मृगजातिविशेषः । **बस्तः** छागः । सर्वत्र विकारे ऽवयवे वा तद्धितः । कृष्णाजिनं ब्राह्मणो, रुरुचर्म क्षत्रियो, वैश्यश् छागचर्म **वसीरन्न्** आच्छादयेयुः । शणक्षुमोर्णास् तत्र कृतानि च वस्त्राणि । **च**शब्दः समुच्चये । तत्रानुत्तरीयाणि शाणादीनि । चर्माण्य् उत्तरीयान्य् औचित्यात् कौपीनाच्छादनानि च वस्त्राण्य् । आनुपूर्व्येण नैकैकस्य सर्वैर् अभिसंबन्धो नापि व्युत्क्रमेण । प्रथमस्य ब्रह्मचारिणः प्रथमेन चर्मणा वस्त्रेण च संबन्धो द्वितीयस्य द्वितीयस्थानस्थेन । तथा च दर्शितम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चान्तरेणापि वचनं लोकत एवैतत् सिद्धम् "चूर्णिताक्षिप्तदग्धानां वज्रानिलहुताशनैः" (म्भ् ७.६६.१८) इति यथाक्रमं संबन्धप्रतिपत्तिः, चूर्णिता वज्रेणाक्षिप्ताः अनिलेन दग्धा अग्निनेति । <u>उच्यते</u> । भवेद् एतद् एवं यदि भेदेन निर्देशः स्यात् समसंख्यात्वं च । इह तु ब्रह्मचारिण इत्य् एकशब्दोपादानान् न क्रमो ऽवगम्यते । त्रयश् च ब्रह्मचारिणः । षड् अनुदेशिनः त्रीणि चर्माणि त्रीणि[^१८०] वस्त्राणि । आनुपूर्व्यग्रहणे[^१८१] तु सति वाक्यान्तरोपात्तः क्रम आश्रीयते । तथा च चर्मभिः संबध्य पुनर् ब्रह्मचारिपदम् आवर्त्य वासोभिः संबध्यते । ततः संख्यासाम्यसिद्धिः । ईदृश एव विषये भगवता पाणिनिना यत्नः कृतः "यथासंख्यम् अनुदेशः समानाम्" इति (पाण् १.३.१०) ॥ २.४१ ॥


[^१८१]:
     M G: ānupūrvagrahaṇe


[^१८०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: trīṇi
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though the term ‘*Kṛṣna*,’ ‘*black*,’ is applied to everything that may
be endowed with the quality of *blackness*,—as we find in the
expressions ‘the black cow,’ ‘the black blanket,’ and so forth,—yet, in
the present context, it is clearly recognised as standing for the ‘black
deer’; firstly because of its occurring along with the ‘skin of the
*Ruru* deer,’ and secondly because of the directions contained in other
*Smṛtis* (which clearly mention the *black deer*).

‘*Ruru*’—is a particular species of the deer.

‘*Basta*’—is the *goat*.

In all the three words (‘*kārṣṇa*’—‘*raurava*’—‘*vāsta*’) the nominal
affix (*aṇ*) denotes either *formation* or *constitution* (*i.e*.,
either ‘formed out of’ or ‘consisting of’).

‘*Should wear*’;—the Brāhmaṇa should cover his body with the skin of the
black antelope, the Kṣatriya with the skin of the *Ruru* deer and the
Vaiśya with the skin of the goat.

*And also cloth* made of *śaṇa* (hemp), *kṣumā* (flax), and *ūrṇā*
(wool).

The particle ‘*ca*’ (‘and also’) has the cumulative force.

The cloth made of hemp and the rest are not to be used as *upper*
garments; and the skins are to be used as upper garments; as such is the
proper course. For *Kaupīna* (loin-slip) and *wrapping*, the cloth is to
be used.

‘*Respecting*’ each of the three castes is not related to all the
clothing that is mentioned; nor are they to be connected in the reverse
order; in fact the first Brahmacārī is connected with the first skin and
first cloth, the second with the second and so forth, as we have shown.

An objection is raised—“Even without the express mention (of the
respective order), it would be understood through usage; for instance,
such expressions as ‘shattered, scattered an d burnt by thunder, wind
and fire’ are always understood to mean ‘shattered by thunder,’
‘scattered by the wind’ and ‘burnt by fire’ (even though *respectivity*
is not expressly mentioned).”

*Answer*.—This could be so understood if the three *Brahma-charts* bad
been mentioned separately, and if the number (of Brahmacāris and the
clothings) were the same. In the present instance, however, we have the
single term ‘Brahmacāris,’ and the three Brahmacāris are not
specifically named in any order. Further, the number of Brahmacāris is
*three*, while that of the correlatives is *six*—three skins and three
cloths. When however the text expressly mentions ‘respectivity,’ the
order of the Brāhmacāris is deduced from that in which they are found to
be spoken of in other texts. And after the ‘three Brahmacharis’ have
been construed with the three *skins*, they are again repeated and
construed with the *cloths*. And in.this manner the compatibility of
numbers is maintained. It is primarily with reference to such cases that
the revered Pāṇini has taken the trouble of laying down that ‘when an
equal number of things are mentioned they are to be taken in their
respective order.’ (1.3.10).—(41)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ruru*’—has been described by Rāghavānanda as ‘tiger.’

*Medhātithi* (p. 92,1. 11)—‘*Smṛtyantara*—This refers to Baudhāyana,
*Gṛhyasūtra*, 2. 5. 16.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p.„ 57) as laying down that the skin
of the *Kṛṣṇamṛga, Ruru* and *Chāga* should be worn as the ‘upper
garment,’ respectively, by the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya,

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446), where it is
explained that the skins mentioned are to be used as the upper garment,
and the hempen and other cloths as the lower garment

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 20) quotes the second half as prescribing the
cloths to be used by the three castes respectively;—and the first half
(on p. 22) as laying down the skins.

The second half is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskā ra, p. 411) and the
first half also (p. 413).

The verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 36), which adds that the
skins of the Black Antelope, the *Ruru* deer and the goat are to be used
as the *upper garment*:—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 430);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 75).

Burnell is again inaccurate in saying that cotton and silk (with the
well to do) are *alone* used now for outer garments.”

Medhātithi rightly remarks that the *triplication* cannot apply to the
Kṣatriya’s girdle; as on triplication the bowstring would cease to be a
‘bowstring. Govindarāja agrees with him. So also *Madanapārijāta* (p.
20) and *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra; p. 432), Rāghavānanda explains that
as the bow-string itself is a triplicated cord, no further triplication
would be necessary.

The ‘*Muñja*’ grass, in Northern India called *muṃja*, is, as Burnell
notes, the *Saccarum Sara* of the botanists.

Madanapārijāta (p. 20) explains that the *Muñja* has ‘*tejanī*’ as its
other name; and a foot-note adds that it is what is called *muragā*.

This verge is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 447);—also in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 432), which explains ‘*trivṛt*’ not as
*twisted three-fold*, but as ‘going round the waist three times’;—in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 189);—in

*Aparārka* (p. 58); in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 70), which explains
‘*trivṛt*’ as *threefold*;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 37), which quotes
Medhātithi to the effect that since bowstrings are made sometimes of
*leather*, the author has added the epithet ‘*Maurvī*’, ‘*Murvā* grass’;
in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 192), which reproduces the above remark of
Medhātithi, as also his further remark that the string is to be removed
from the bow and then tied round the waist: it adds the following notes:
the ‘*Samā*’, not uneven, thin in one place and thick in another; it
should be of uniform thickness all through;—the three-fold twist applies
to the hempen cord and not to the bow-string, which would cease to be a
bowstring when so twisted;—it is quoted also in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 43 b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.18.23.—‘Skins of the black deer, the spotted
deer and the goat; cloths of hemp, flax, tree-bark and kuśa grass,—for
all; also of cotton, pure white; according to some, also red-coloured,
for the Brāhmaṇa, dyed in tree-bark, for the other two castes, dyed in
*mañjiṣṭhā* and *haridrā*.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘For all, the cotton cloth in its natural
colour.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.15.—‘The skins of the black deer, the
spotted deer and the goat are the *skins*.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.39-41.—‘For clothing—hempen, flaxen and
skin—some people advice the reddish-brown cloth.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.3.1-9.—‘For the Kṣatriya, dyed in Mañjiṣṭhā;
for the Vaiśya, dyed in Haridrā; for the Brāhmaṇa, the skin of the white
or black deer; for the Kṣatriya, the skin of the spotted deer; for the
Vaiśya, the skin of the goat; the sheep-skin for all castes; as also the
woolen cloth; if the student is desirous of Brāhmic glory, he should
wear the skins alone; if desirous of Kṣattric glory, he should wear the
cloths alone; if desirous of both kinds of glory, he should wear both.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.47.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the upper garment consists
of the skin of the black deer; for the Kṣatriya, of the skin of the
spotted deer; for the Vaiśya, of the skin of the cow or of the goat.’
\[Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413, reads for ‘Gavyam,’ ‘*āvyam*,’ which
means ‘of sheep.’ \]

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.49.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the doth new and white; for
the Kṣatriya, dyed in Mañjiṣṭhā; for the Vaiśya, dyed in Haridrā, or
silken; for all, woven cloth, undyed; the new white cotton cloth, as
also the hempen.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.19-20.—‘The upper garment should he of cotton, hemp
and wool; and the skins of the deer, the tiger and the goat.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.19.7.—‘The hoy should be adorned and having
his head shaven according to family-custom, clothed in new cloth or in
skin; the Brāhmaṇa in the skin of the black deer, the Kṣatriya in that
of the spotted deer, and the Vaiśya in that of the goat.’ \[The
‘*ahata*,’ ‘new,’ cloth has been thus defined by Pracetas:—‘slightly
washed, fresh-white, with ends intact, never worn before’—Vira-Saṃskāra,
p. 411.\]

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 411).—‘If they wear cloth, then
the Brāhmaṇa should wear the reddish-brown, the Kṣatṭriya that dyed in
Mañjiṣṭhā, and the Vaiśya that dyed in Haridrā.’

*Pāraskara- Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.16-19.—‘Cloths, hempen, flaxen and woolen;
for the Brahmaṇa, the upper garment is the skin of the black deer; for
the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; and for the Vaiśya, either that
of the cow or the goat; or that of the cow for all.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyaṣūtra*, 2.10.7-8.—‘The cloths for these are flaxen,
hempen, cotton, and woolen; and the skins, those of the black deer, the
spotted deer and the goat.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.10.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa the cloth should be of
flax or of hemp; for the Kṣatriya of cotton; for the Vaiśya of wool.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 412).—‘The clothing to be worn
should be always white, whether it consists of flax, or cotton, or
grass, or skin, or tree-bark, or wool.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 412).—‘The water-pot, the
sacrificial thread and the reddish-brown cloth—these are common.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskara, p. 413).—‘The skins of the Kṛṣṇa,
the Ruru and the Pṛṣat deer.’

*Hīraṇyakeśin* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa the
skin of the black deer; for the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; for
the Vaiśya, that of the goat.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘The upper garment should
consist of the skins of the black deer, the spotted deer and the goat.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘The Brāhmaṇa, the skin of the
black deer; the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; and the Vaiśya, the
skin of the goat; or the skin of the spotted deer, for all.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘For all, the skin of the Rum, the hempen
cloth and the woolen cloth, according to their circumstances, should
form the lower garment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 414).—‘The skin for the Brāhmaṇa is of the
black deer; for the Kṣatriya, of the spotted deer; for the Vaiśya of the
goat; and the cloths are hempen, flaxen and woolen.’

\[The idea is that the lower garment should consist of *cloth* and the
upper garment of *skin.\]*

The size of the ‘skin’ to be worn has been prescribed by Śākala
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 414)—as ‘48 *aṅgulas* long and 4 *aṅgulas*
broad.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

041	Let students, according to the order (of their castes), wear (as upper dresses) the skins of black antelopes, spotted deer, and he-goats, and (lower garments) made of hemp, flax or wool.
</details>
