+++
title = "043 मुञ्जालाभे तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the event of Muñja (and thb rest) being not available, they should be made of Kuśa, Ashmantaka and Balvaja,—triplicated with one, three or four knots.—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आदिशब्दलोपम् अत्र स्मरन्ति । **मुञ्जाद्यलाभ** इति । **कर्तव्या** इति च बहुवचनम् उपपन्नतरम् । भिन्नजातिसंबन्धितया सुव्यक्तो मेखलाभेदः । एकजातिसंबन्धित्वे तु केवलव्यक्तिभेदालम्बनं बहुवचनं स्यात् । विप्रस्येति च प्रकृतस्य बहुवचनेन परिणामः कर्तव्यः । विकल्पश् चैकविषयत्वे स्यात् । न च संभवत्यां गतौ विकल्पो युक्तः । 

- तेन मुञ्जाभावे कौशी । ज्याया अभावे ऽश्मन्तकेन । शाणानां बल्वजैः। तृणौषधिवचनात् कुशादयः । प्रतिनिधिनियमश् चायम् । कुशाद्यभावे ऽप्य् अन्यन् मुञ्जादिसदृशम् उपादेयम् । 

- **त्रिवृत्ता ग्रन्थिनैकेन** । नायं ग्रन्थिसंख्याभेदो वर्णभेदेन । अपि तु प्रत्येकं विकल्पः । कुशादिमेखलास्व् अप्य् अयं ग्रन्थिभेदो धर्मभेदश् चोद्यमानः स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचारस्यानित्यत्वे ऽपि द्रष्टव्यः ॥ २.४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Writers declare that the phrase ‘and the rest’ is understood, the sense
being ‘in the event of Muñja *and the rest* being not available.’ And
the reason for this is that it is only thus that the plural number
‘should be made,’ becomes more appropriate; specially as the diversity
of the girdle has been clearly prescribed in accordance with the
diversity of castes. If the girdle spoken of in the present verse were
meant for that of any one caste only, then the plural number could be
justified only by taking it as referring to the girdle worn by the
endless individual members of that one caste; and further, it would be
necessary in this case to alter the singular number in ‘*viprasya*’ (of
the preceding verse) into the plural number (to bring it into conformity
with the present verse); and lastly, in this case all the three
alternatives herein mentioned would have to be taken as pertaining to
the one girdle (of the Brāhmaṇa only). And no such multiplicity of
option should be allowed so long as there is any other way of taking the
text.

Thus then the sense of the present verse is as follows—(*a*) if *Muñja*
is not available, the girdle should be made of *Kuśa*; if the
*bow-string* is not available, it should be made of *Ashmantaka*; and
(*c*) if the hempen fibre is not available it should be made of
*Balvaja*.

The terms ‘*kuśa*,’ etc., denote grasses and herbs.

This verse is meant to restrict the choice of substitutes; so that in
the absence of *kuśa*, etc., one would not be justified in using any
other similar substances.

*Triplicated by one knot*. The various numbers (of knots) are not meant
to be restricted to the three castes respectively; they are intended to
be optional alternatives for every one of them. This difference in the
number of knots in the girdle made of kuśa, etc., as well as the other
details laid down in connection with it are to be regarded as regular
injunctions, even though the customs laid down in other Smṛtis are not
necessarily binding.—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 447),—and also in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 20), which latter agrees with Medhātithi in taking
the *Kuśa-Aśmāntaka-Balvaja* as pertaining to the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya
and the Vaiśya respectively.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 433) explains that the term ‘*Muñja*’ in
the present verse stands for all its variants mentioned in the preceding
verse, and proceeds to quote the view that what is meant is that—(*a*)
for the Brāhmaṇa in the absence of *Muñja, Kuśa* should be used,—(*b*)
for the Kśatriya in the absence of *Murvā, Aśmāntaka*, and (*c*) for the
Vaiśya in the absence of *Śaṇa, Balvaja*; but dissents from it, stating
it as its own opinion, that all the three substitutes mentioned are
meant for each of the primary substances enjoined before. It cites
another view, according to which, since the present verse mentions the
*Muñja* only, the meaning must be that the three substitutes are meant
for the Brāhmaṇa only; so that for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, if the
substance primarily prescribed under the preceding verse be not
available, they should make use of some other suitable material
resembling the primary. But this view also is not approved as being in
conflict with the text of Yama, which says that—“in the absence, of
*these i.e*. the three, *Muñja, Murvā* and *Śaṇa*, the girdle should be
made of *Kuśa, Aśmāntaka* and *Balvaja*.”

The second half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra) on
page 432, where it adds that the options mentioned do not depend
entirely on the wish of the wearer,—the number of knots being, in fact,
determined by the number of *Pravaras* of the *Gotra* to which the boy
belongs.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 189) also quotes this verse;—and *Aparārka* (p. 58),
which explains that the knots are to be made in accordance with one’s
‘Gotra-ṛṣis’;—also *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 37), which quotes Kullūka’s
explanation;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 193) as setting forth
substitutes for the girdle-zone; it adds the following notes:—The term
‘*ādi*’ is understood here, the construction being ‘*Muñjādyabhāve*’,
‘in the absence of Muñja *and other substances*’; the number of knots is
to be the same as that of the wearer’s *Pravara*;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 43b);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 80), which adds
the note that ‘*trivṛt*’ means ‘threefold’; and that ‘*Muñja*’ here
stands for the *Murvā* and other substances specified in the preceding
verse.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.24.—‘In the absence of Muñja, it should
consist of Kuśa, Ashman taka and Balvaja.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Sarhskāra, p. 433).—‘In the absence of these
(Muñja, Murvā and Hemp), it should consist of Kuśa, Ashmantaka and
Balvaja; and girdles should be made threefold with either one or three
knots.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 432).—‘The girdle should
be made triplicated; turned round three times; its knots should he three
or five or seven.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

043	If Munga grass (and so forth) be not procurable, (the girdles) may be made of Kusa, Asmantaka, and Balbaga (fibres), with a single threefold knot, or with three or five (knots according to the custom of the family).
</details>
