+++
title = "044 कार्पासम् उपवीतम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Sacrificial Thread worn over the shoulder,—which is triple and twisted upwards,—should be hade op cotton for the Brāhmaṇa, of hempen fibres for the Kṣatriya, and op woolen fibres for the Vaiśya.—(44)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उपवीतशब्देन वासो विन्यासविशेष उच्यते । वक्ष्यति "उद्धृते दक्षिणे पाणौ" (म्ध् २.६३) इति । तच् च धर्ममात्रम् । तस्य न कार्पासता संभवत्य् अतो धर्मेण धर्मी लक्ष्यते, यस्यासौ विन्यासस् तत् कार्पासम् उच्यते । अर्श आदित्वाद् वा मत्वर्थीयो ऽकारः कर्तव्यः, उपवीतवद् उपवीतम् इति । 

- **ऊर्ध्ववृत्तम्** ऊर्ध्वां दिशं दिशं प्रतिवर्त्यते वेष्ट्यते । **त्रिवृत्** त्रिगुणम् । कर्तनिकाभ्यो लब्धसूत्रभावस्य त्रिगुणीकृतस्येदम् ऊर्ध्वनिवर्तनं[^१८३] विधीयते । संहत्य तन्तुत्रयम् ऊर्ध्ववेष्टनेन रज्ज्वाकारं कृत्वा तेनोपवीतं कुर्यात् । सा च रज्जुर् एकैव धारयितव्या, तिस्रः पञ्च सप्त वा । यज्ञसंबन्धाद् धि तद् यज्ञोपवीताख्यां[^१८४] लभते । यज्ञार्थो ऽयम् उद्यते इति भक्त्योपचर्यते । तत्रेष्टिपशुसोमानां यज्ञरूपतयैकत्वाद् एकतन्तुकं क्रियते । अग्नित्रयसाध्यत्वाद् अहीनैकाहसत्रभेदाद् वा त्रितन्तुकम् । सोमसंस्थानां सप्तसङ्ख्यत्वात् सप्त वा तन्तवः । "त्रीणि सवनानि त्रिसंध्येन" इति पञ्च । सूत्राभावे[^१८५] पटादिनापि कर्तव्यम् । स्मृत्यन्तर एवम् उक्तम् । 


[^१८५]:
     M G: pañcasūtrābhāve


[^१८४]:
     G: -ākhyaṃ


[^१८३]:
     M G 1st ed.: triguṇīkṛtavedamūrdhani vartanaṃ

- अविः मेषस् तस्य सूत्रं तेन कृतं **आविकसूत्रिकम्** । अध्यात्मादित्वाट् ठञ् कर्तव्यः । "अविकसूत्रिकम्" इति वा पठितव्यम् । तत्र च मत्वर्थीयेन ठना रूपसिद्धिः ॥ २.४४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*upavīta*’ stands for the peculiar manner in which cloth is
worn; as will be explained later in Verse 63; as such, it is only a
*quality*; and since this *quality* cannot be *made of cotton*, the
quality is taken as standing for the thing to which the quality belongs;
the meaning being that the *thing* that is to be worn in the particular
way should be made of cotton; the term ‘*upavītam*’ being regarded as
formed with the ‘*ach*’ affix, according to Pāṇini 5.2.127, ‘*upavītam*’
being equivalent to ‘*upavītavat*.’

‘*Twisted upwards*’—*i.e*., turned round, coiled upwards.

‘*Triple*’—consisting of three yarns.

This ‘*twisting upwards*’ is laid down for that article which, on coming
out of the spinning wheel, has acquired the properties of the ‘yarn’ and
has then been folded three times. That is to say, three yarns should be
brought together and by upward twisting made into a cord, and then used
as the ‘sacred thread.’ Of this cord, either only one or three or five
or seven should be worn. It comes to be known as the ‘*sacrificial*
thread’ by reason of its being connected with sacrificial performances;
in as much as it is worn for the purposes of sacrificial performances,
it is so called figuratively.

Now, of the three kinds of sacrifice, the *Iṣṭi*, the *Paśu* and the
*Soma* sacrifices, it may be worn single at all these, when they are all
looked upon as ‘sacrifices’ in general (and hence, uniform); or it may
be worn three-fold, when they are looked upon either as performed with
the help of *three* fires, or as being divided into the *three* classes
of ‘*Ahīna*,’

‘*Ekāha*’ and ‘*Satra*’; or again, it may be worn seven-fold, in view of
the number of stages in the Soma sacrifice being *seven*; or lastly, it
may be worn five-fold, in view of there being *three* ‘Savanas’
(extractions of Soma-juice) and two ‘*Sandhyās*’ (twilights).

\[In the absence of Cotton\], the ‘Thread’ may be made of silk and other
fibres also; such is the direction given ill other *Smṛtis*.

‘*Avi*’ is *sheep*; the yarn made of wool is ‘woolen fibre’; the term
‘*ārik?sūtrikam*’ being formed with the ‘*ṭhañ*’ affix, according to the
*Vārtika on* Paṇini 4.3.60. Or, we may read ‘*avikasūtrikam*’ this word
being formed with the ‘*ṭhan*’ affix having the sense of the
possessive.—(14)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtichandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 80), Which says
that ‘*trivṛt*’ means ‘made of nine yarns’;—and in *Nityāchārapradīpa*
(p. 31).

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 448); in *Madanapārijāta*
(p. 21),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 414);—also in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 190);—in *Aparārka* (p. 58);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 43a);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 38), which has the
following notes:—‘*ūrdhvavṛtam*’ and ‘*trivṛt*’ are to be construed with
‘*śaṇasūtramayam*’; also,—‘*āvikam*’ means ‘of sheep- *wool*.’

‘*Urdhvavṛtam*’—This is thus defined by ‘*Saṅgrahākāra*.’ a writer
quoted in Parāśaramādhava and Madanapārijāta—‘That which is twisted
threefold by the right hand moving upward’—*i.e*. twisted towards the
right.

‘*Trivṛt*’—has been explained in *Vīramitrodaya* as standing for
‘consisting of *nine* threads’; and thus on the basis of a *Śruti* text
which defines ‘*Trivṛt*’ as *nine*. The same explanation is given in
*Aparārka* also;—so also *Smṛtikaumudī* (p. 6.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 5.5.—‘The Sacred Garment consists of the
silken thread triplicated, hanging down to the navel and passing under
the right arm.’ \[‘*Kauśa*’ has been taken to mean ‘silken’ by the
*Kalpataru*, but ‘made of *kuśa*’ by the *Vīramitrodaya-* Saṃskāra, p.
415.\]

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.19.—‘The sacred garment and the cloths are to be of
cotton, hempen fibre and wool.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 415).—‘Cotton thread is for all.’

*Gobhila* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 415).—‘The sacred garment is made
of cotton, cloth or *Kuśa* -string.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Sarhskāra,p. 415).—‘The Twice-born should wear
the sacred garment made of cotton or flax or cow-hair or hemp or
tree-bark or grass.’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The sacred thread should be made of
nine-yarned thread.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The purposes of the sacred
garment should be served by means of the cloth, and in the absence of
cloth, by means of the Triplicated Thread.’

*Ādityapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The sacred garment to be worn
should consist of either flax or cotton or hemp.’

*Bhṛgu and Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 416).—‘The Upavīta should consist of
three threads twisted upwards, then twisted downwards, then twisted
upwards again.

*Gṛhyapariśiṣṭa* (Do.).—‘One thread should be folded thrice and then
twisted three times.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘The sacred garment should consist of nine threads, with
a single knot.’

*Paiṭhinasi* (Do.).—‘The sacred garment should be of cotton for the
Brāhmaṇa consisting of six triplicated threads; for the Kṣatriya, of
flax, and for the Vaiśya, of wool.’

*Bhṛgu* (Do., p. 421).—‘For the Student there should be only one
Upavīta, for the Householder and the Recluse, two; and for the
Renunciate also only one.’

*Bhṛgu* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘Three threads should he twisted upwards in
three folds; the Upavīta shall be triplicated; and it should have a
single knot.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘For the Accomplished Student there should he two
Upavītas.’

*Kaśyapa* (Do.).—‘For the Householder, they may he three, four, five,
eight or ten; for the Student only one; so also for the Recluse.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 422).—‘One should always wear the Upavīta.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘It should he of three threads
three-fold, twisted upward and turned downwards. It has one knot.’

*Pariśiṣṭa* (Do., p. 423).—‘During acts in honour of Gods, the garment
should be worn on the left shoulder (technically called *Upavīta*);
during those in honour of Pitṛs, on the right shoulder (technically
called *Prāchīnāvīta*); during malevolent rites, on both shoulders,
hanging over the chest down to the navel; and during the vulgar act,
hanging on the hack (technically called *nivīta*).’

*Śruti* (Darśapūrṇamāsa section—quoted by Śabara, 3.4.1).—‘*Nivīta* for
men, *Prachīnāvīta* for Pitṛs and *Upavīta* for Gods.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

044	The sacrificial string of a Brahmana shall be made of cotton, (shall be) twisted to the right, (and consist) of three threads, that of a Kshatriya of hempen threads, (and) that of a Vaisya of woollen threads.
</details>
