+++
title = "045 ब्राह्मणो बैल्व-पालाशौ"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa should, by law, have staves of Bilva and Palāśa wood; the Kṣatriya those of Vaṭa and Khadira; and the Vaiśya those of Pīlu and Udumbara.—(45).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि द्वन्द्वनिर्देशे गुणविधिष्व् एकत्वश्रवणात् "केशान्तकः" (म्ध् २.४६) इति "प्रतिगृह्येप्सितं दण्डम्" (म्ध् २.४८) इति च विकल्पितम् एकदण्डधारं प्रतीयते । "बैल्वः पालाशो ब्राह्मणस्य दण्डः" (च्ड़्। पार्ग् २.५.२५) इति गृह्ये । गौतमीये चैकदण्डग्रहणम् एवोक्तम् (च्ड़्। ग्ध् १.२२) । इह केवला दण्डसत्ता श्रूयते- **दण्डान् अर्हन्ति** । दण्डा एते ब्रह्मचारिणां योज्याः । कस्यां क्रियायाम् इत्य् एतद् अत्र चोक्तम् उत्तरत्र भविष्यति "प्रतिगृह्येप्सितम्" (म्ध् २.४८) इति । तस्मिंश् च ग्रहणे दण्डस्योपायत्वाद् विवक्षितम् एकत्वम् अत इह द्विवचननिर्देशः । देवश् चेद् वर्षेद् बहवः कृषिं कुर्युर् इति यथा प्राप्तानुवादः । बिल्वपलाशवटखदिरपीलूदुम्बरा[^१८६] वृक्षजातिविशेषनामधेयानि । बिल्वस्य विकारो ऽवयवो वा बैल्वः । एवं सर्वत्र । प्रदर्शनार्थाश् चैते । "यज्ञिया वा सर्वेषाम्" (ग्ध् १.२४) इति वचनात् । एतान् दण्डान् वक्ष्यमाणे कार्ये **अर्हन्ति** । **धर्मतः** शास्त्रतः ॥ २.४५ ॥


[^१८६]:
     M G: -ūdumbara
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though the text uses the Copulative Compound (which implies that
two staves have to be carried), yet, in as much as in connection with
the detailed qualifications of the staff laid down in the text, we find
the singular number used,—*e.g*., in the next verse, and in Verse 18
below,—it is understood that only one staff is to be carried; specially
as in the *Gṛhya-sūtra* we read—‘the Brāhmaṇa’s *staff*’ is of Bilva or
Palāśa’; and the Gautama-sūtra speaks of the carrying of *one* staff
only. In the present context all that is done is to lay down the mere
possibility of the staff; the expression ‘should have staves’ meaning
that the said staves are fit for Brahmacārīs. As regards the question as
to the act during which the staff is to be held, we shall have the
answer in Verse 48 below; so that the *staff* being only an auxiliary to
that act, the singular number used in that verse must be regarded as
significant. For these reasons the

Dual number used in the present verse must be taken merely as referring
to all possible staves; just like the plural number in the assertion—‘if
God were to give rain *many persons* would take to cultivation.’

‘*Bilva*,’ ‘*Palāśa*,’ ‘*Vaṭa*,’ ‘*Khadira’ Pīlu*’ and ‘*bara*’ are
names of particular species of trees.

‘*Bailva*’ means ‘made of Bilva’; and so with the rest.

The naming of the woods is meant to be merely illustrative; as the
general rule is that ‘staves made of sacred woods are fit for all
castes’ (*Gautama* 1.1.24).

These staves the Brahmacārīs ‘*should* *have*’ during the act to be
described below (in 48);—‘*by law*’—*i.e*., in accordance with
scriptural injunctions.—(45)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 447);—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 22),—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 436);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 930), which last points out that the copulative
compound ‘*bailvapālaśau*’ should not be taken to imply that two staves
have to be taken up; because later on, in verse 48, we have the singular
form ‘*daṇḍam*’;—in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 189), and *Aparārka* (p. 57);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra p. 43b);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
77), which adds that the text lays down optional alternatives;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 37), which adds that a combination of all the
staves is not meant, only one staff being held, as is clear from the
singular number in the next verse; they are to be taken as optional
alternatives;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 193), which, along with
*Mayūkha* reads ‘*paippala*’ or ‘*pailava*,’ and adds that option is
clearly meant.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bodhāyana-Dhannasūtra*, 1.2.16.—‘The staves are to be of a sacrificial
tree.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.21.26.—‘The staff of the Brāhmaṇa is of Bilva
and Palāśa; for the rest, of Aśvattha and Pīlu; or for all, of some
sacrificial wood.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.37.—‘The staff for tho Brāhmaṇa is of
Palāśa; for the Kṣatriya, of the trunk or of the lower ends of the
Nyagrodha tree; for the Vaiśya, of Badara or Udumbara; some people
prescribe simply that the staff should be of some tree, without
reference to particular castes.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.45.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the staff is of Palāśa or
Bilva; for the Kṣatriya of Nyagrodha; for the Vaiśya, of Udumbara.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.21.—‘Staves are of Palāśa, Khadira and Udumbara.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 19.12-13.—‘The staff for the Brāhmaṇa is of
Palāśa; for the Kṣatriya, of Udumbara; for the Vaiśva, of Bilva.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.25-28.—‘The staff for the Brāhmaṇa is of
Palāśa; for the Kṣatriya, of Bilva; for the Vaiśya, of Udumbara; or all
for all.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.11.—‘Staves are of Palāśa, Bilva and
Aśvattha.’

*Hīraṇyakeśin* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 134).—‘The staff for the
Brāhmaṇa is of Bilva or Palāśa; for the Kṣatriya, of Nyagrodha; for the
Vaiśya, of Udumbara.’

*Bhaviṣya-purāṇa* (Do., p. 434).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the staff is of
Bilva, Palāśa and Plakṣa; for the Kṣatriya, of Nyagrodha, Khadira and
Vetasa; for tho Vaiśya, of Pīlu, Udumbara and Aśvattha.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskara, p. 435).—‘The staves are of Palāśa,
Pippala and Bilva, respectively.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p.437).—‘Staves of Bilva, Palāśa, Khadira,
Aśvattha, Pīlu and Udumbara.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do., 435).—‘For the Vaiśya, of Udumbara or Badara and
Varaṇa.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 57).—‘In the absence of those enumerated, any
sacrificial wood may be used by any caste.’

The ‘sacrificial trees have been enumerated in Brahma-purāṇa, as
follows:—‘Śamī, Palāśa, Nyagrodha, Plakṣa, Vikaṅkata, Aśvattha,
Udumbara, Bilva, Chandana, Sarala, Sālva, Devadāru and Khadira.’
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskara, p. 435).
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

045	A Brahmana shall (carry), according to the sacred law, a staff of Bilva or Palasa; a Kshatriya, of Vata or Khadira; (and) a Vaisya, of Pilu or Udumbara.
</details>
