+++
title = "049 भवत्-पूर्वञ् चरेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa, having undergone Initiation, should beg for food with words of which ‘bhavat’ (‘Lady’) forms the beginning; the Kṣatriya with words of which ‘bhavat’ forms the middle; and the Vaiśya with words of which ‘bhavat’ forms the end.—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

भिक्षाप्रार्थनावाक्यम् अत्र **भैक्ष**शब्देनोच्यते । तस्य हि **भवच्**छब्दपूर्वता संभवति, न भक्तादेर् अर्थस्य । स्त्रीणां च प्रथमं भिक्ष्यमाणतयोपदेशात् प्रार्थनायां च प्रार्थ्यमानस्य संबोध्यत्वात् संबुद्धिविभक्त्यन्तः स्त्रीलिङ्गो भवच्छब्दः प्रयोक्तव्यः । क्रम एव चात्रादृष्टार्थो नियम्यते । यथार्थं तु शब्दप्रोयोगो "भवति भिक्षां देहि" इति ।

- <u>कुतः</u> पुनः संस्कृतशब्दार्थलाभः यावता स्त्रियः संबोध्यन्ते । ताश् च संस्कृतं नावबुद्ध्यन्ते । <u>नित्यम्</u> उपनयनम् । तस्य च शब्दोच्चारणम् अङ्गत्वेनोक्तम् इति । अनित्याश् चापभ्रंशाः । न तैर् नित्यस्य संयोग उपपद्यते । तथैव च शिष्टा असाधून् उपश्रुत्यैकदेशसादृश्येन साधून् संस्मृत्यार्थं प्रतियन्त्य् असाधुर् अनुमानेन वाचक इति दर्शनेन गाशब्दो हि सादृश्याद् गोशब्दम् अनुमापयति । ततो ऽर्थप्रतिपत्तेः, एवं स्त्रियः सादृश्यात् साधुभ्यः असाधून् उत्पन्नसंबन्धात् स्मृत्वा तेभ्यो ऽर्थं प्रत्येष्यन्ति । स्वल्पाक्षरं चैतत् पदत्रयं सर्वत्र प्रसिद्धं स्त्रीभिर् अपि सुज्ञानम् । एवं **भवन्मध्यं** क्षत्रियः "भिक्षां भवति देहि" इति । तथा **वैश्यो** भवच्छब्द उत्तरम् अस्येति, **भवदुत्तरं** वाक्यं समासार्थः[^१९१] ।


[^१९१]:
     J: samārtham

- **उपनीत** इति भूतप्रत्ययनिर्देशाद् आन्वहिके ऽपि वृत्त्यर्थे भैक्ष्यचरणे ऽयम् एव विधिर् इति दर्शयति । "एष प्रोक्तो हि द्विजातीनाम् औपनायनिकः" (म्ध् २.६८) इत्य् अत्रोपनयनप्रकरणम् उपसंहरन्न् उपनयनाङ्गस्यापि भैक्ष्यस्यायम् एव विधिर् इत्य् आह । अन्यथाकरणाद् उपनयनाङ्गम् एवैतत् स्याद् यदि वा भूतप्रत्ययसामर्थ्यात्[^१९२] प्रकरणं बाधित्वा वृत्त्यर्थ एव भैक्ष्ये । उपनीयमानस्य तदङ्गं यद्भैक्षं यच् चाहर् अहर् वृत्त्यर्थं तत्र सर्वत्रायं धर्मः ॥ २.४९ ॥


[^१९२]:
     M G 1st ed. : yadi vā na pratyaya-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The word ‘*bhaikṣam*’ here stands for the words with which the request
for alms is preferred; as it is only the words that can have ‘*bhavat*’
as the ‘beginning’; the food itself could not have any such beginning.

In as much as it is laid down that ladies are the first to be begged
from first, and in the request made it is the person begged from that is
addressed, it is the feminine vocative form of the term ‘*bhavat*’ that
should be used.

All that the present text does is to lay down the order of the words to
he used, there being some transcendental purpose served by the order.
The actual words used should be—‘*bhavati bhikṣām dehi*,’ ‘O Lady, give
me food.’

*Question*,—“ Wherefore could there be any possibility of

Sanskrit words being used, since they are addressed to women, and they
do not understand Sanskrit

*Answer*.—The Initiatory ceremony, being compulsory, is of an eternal
character; and it is in connection with this ceremony that the use of
the words is laid down. The vernaculars (corrupt languages) are not
eternal; so that there could be no connection between these and an
eternal ceremony. Then again, just as when educated people hear corrupt
forms of words used, they are reminded, by the resemblance, of the
corresponding correct forms and thereby come to comprehend the
meaning;—for instance, the (incorrect) word ‘*?ā*’ leads to the
inference (remembrance of) of the (correct) word ‘*go'* through
similarity, according to the theory that ‘the incorrect word is
expressive only by inference, and the meaning is comprehended from the
inferred correct word’; in the same manner when correct words are
addressed to women, they remember, through similarity, the corresponding
incorrect words whoso meaning they know, and thus they come to
comprehend the; meaning of the words used. Further, the expression in
question is a short, one consisting of three words only, and these being
well-known words, they would be easily comprehensible by ladies also.

Similarly the *Kṣatriya* should use words of which the ‘*bhavat*’ forms
the middle; the actual form being ‘*bhikṣām bhavati dehi*,’ ‘Give me, O
Lady, food.’ So the Vaiśya should use words of which ‘*bhavat*’ forms
the end. The word ‘*bhavaduttaram*’ means ‘that of which *bhavat* forms
the end’;—the compound thus standing for the sentence (give me food, O
Lady’).

‘*Having undergone Initiation*’;—the past-participial ending implies
that the rule laid down here is to be observed also in connection with
the begging for food for daily living (even after the first day of the
initiation); and further, what is said in verse 68 below—‘such is the
procedure of initiation for the twice-born’—is a summing up of the whole
section on ‘Initiation’; and hence shows that the rule laid down in the
present verse applies also to that begging for alms whicḥ forms part of
the ceremony of Initiation. If we do not take it thus, then what is laid
down here would only he taken either as a part of the Initiation-rites
(as shown by the context), or as applying to the ordinary begging for
food;—in this latter case the implication of the context would be
rejected and stress would be laid only upon the sense of the
past-participial ending (‘having undergone Initiation’) As a matter of
fact, what is here prescribed is applicable to that ‘begging for food’
which forms part of the Initiatory Rites, as also to that which is done
for the purposes of livelihood.—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 936); in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
32), which latter adds, the following notes:—

In the phrase ‘*bhaikṣam charet*’ the verb indicates *begging*, as is
shown by the objective term ‘*bhaikṣam*’; it is in view of this that the
expression to be used in the begging is—‘*bhikṣām dehi*’ (‘give
alms’);—and as the words have to be addressed with proper respect, the
term ‘*bhavat*’ with the vocative ending (‘Madam’ or ‘Sir’) has to be
added at the beginning, middle or end, according to the caste of the
begging boy;—then, inasmuch as in the house, it is, as a rule, the
women-folk that give alms, it follows that the feminine-(vocative) form
of the term ‘*bhavat*’ should be used;—thus then the precise form of the
expression comes to be this—(*a*) The Brāhamaṇa boy should say ‘*bhavati
bhikṣām dehi*’, (*b*) the Kṣatriya, ‘*bhikṣām bhavati dehi*,’ and (*c*)
the Vaiśya, ‘*bhikṣām dehi bhavati*’. There is no such hard and fast
rule as that ‘alms should be begged from *women only*.’

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 481) also quotes the verse, and supplies
the formula as noted in *Madanapārijāta*;—*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 60)
quotes it, and lays down the formula for the three castes as—(*a*)
‘*bhavati bhikṣām dadātu*’, (*b*) ‘*bhikṣām bhavatī dadātu*,’ and (*c*)
‘*bhikṣām dadātu bhavati*—*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 108), which
mentions the formula as given in *Madanapārijāta*;—and also
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyāvahāra, p. 124).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmaṣūtra*, 2.43.—‘The term *bhavat* shall be used in the
beginning, middle or end, respectively, according to the caste.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.17-18.—‘In the formula used, the term
*bhavat* should come in the beginning and the term *bhikṣām* in the
middle. In begging, the Brāhmaṇa should use the term *bhavat* in the
beginning; the Kṣatriya, in the middle; the Vaiśya, in the end.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmaṣūtra*, 1,3.28-30.—‘The Brāhmaṇa should beg alms with
words beginning with *bhavat*, the Kṣatriya with words having *bhavat*
in the middle, and the Vaiśya with words having *bhavat* in the end.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.50.—‘The Brāhmaṇa should beg alms with words
beginning with *bhavat*, the Kṣatriya, with *bhavat* in the middle, and
the Vaiśya, with *bhavat* in the end.’

*Viṣṇu-Smrti*, 27.25.—‘Alms-begging is accompanied by the term *bhavat*
in the beginning, in the middle and in the end.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.30.—‘The alms-begging of the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣattnya and
the Vaiśya, should be accompanied by the term *bhavat* in the beginning,
middle and end, respectively.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 22.8.—‘The formula used should be *bhavat
bhikṣām dadātu*.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 5.2.2-4).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should beg alms with the
term *bhavat* in the beginning; the Kṣatriya, with the term *bhavat* in
the middle; the Vaiśya, with the term *bhavat* in the end.’

*Śaunaka* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 439).—‘In begging from males, he
should say *bhikṣām bhavat dadātu*, and in begging from females *bhikṣām
bhavatī dadātu*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

049	An initiated Brahmana should beg, beginning (his request with the word) lady (bhavati); a Kshatriya, placing (the word) lady in the middle, but a Vaisya, placing it at the end (of the formula).
</details>
