+++
title = "051 समाहृत्य तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having collected as much food as may be needed, and having offered it, without guile, to his Teacher, he should eat it, with his face to the east, after having sipped water and become pure.—(51)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**समाहृत्य्**एति शब्दो बह्वीभ्य आहरणं दर्शयति । नैकस्याः सकाशात् बह्व्यो ग्रहीतव्याः । **तद्** इति यस्यानन्तरं शब्दसंनिधिर् वृत्त्यर्थस्य, न प्राकरणिकस्योपनयनाङ्गस्य । तस्य हि गृह्यकारैः- "अनुप्रवचनीयं श्रपयेत्" (आश्ग् १.२२.१२) इति विहितम्, न भोजनम् । "तिष्ठेद् अहःशेषम्" (आश्ग् १.२२.१) इति च कृतप्रातराशस्य चोपनयनम् । अतो नोपनयनाङ्गं भैक्षभोजनम् । 

- **यावदर्थं** यावता बैक्ष्येण तृप्ताख्यप्रयोजननिर्वृत्तिः । न बहु भिक्षितव्यम् । **अमायया निवेद गुरवे** न कदन्नेन संस्कृतम् अन्नं प्रच्छाद्य कदन्नं गुरोः प्रकाशयेत् । कदन्नं[^१९३] किल एष न ग्रहीष्यतीत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या । निवेदनम् "इदं प्राप्तम्" इति प्रकटीकरणम् । अगृहीते गुरुणा अनुज्ञातो **अश्नीयात्** । कथं पुनर् निवेदनम् अदृष्टसंस्कारार्थम् एव न भवति, इतिहासप्रामाण्यात् । तथा च भगवान् व्यासः त्रितकूपाख्याने "गुरुणा गृहीतम्" इति दर्शितवान् । "अनुज्ञातो भुञ्जीत" (ग्ध् २.३९) इति यत् क्वचिच् छ्रूयते । **आचम्य प्राङ्मुखः** । आचमने प्राङ्मुखतेयम् आनन्तर्याद् इति केचित् । तद् अयुक्तम् । "प्रागुदङ्मुखः" (म्ध् २.६१) इत्य् आचमने दिङ्नियमो भविष्यति । तस्माद् भोजनेनैव संबन्धः । **शुचिः** । चाण्डालादिदर्शनम् अशुचि देशाक्रमनिष्ठीवनादि कृताचमनस्य भोजनकाले ऽनेन निषिध्यते ॥ २.५१ ॥


[^१९३]:
     M G 1st ed.: tadannaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*having collected*’ shows that the food should be obtained
from several ladies, and a large quantity should not be obtained from a
single lady.

‘*It*’—refers to that which has gone immediately before this, *i.e*.,
the food begged for ordinary eating, and not that which is done as part
of the Initiation-rites, with which the context deals; specially as with
regard to the latter all that the Gṛḥya-Sūtra prescribes is that the
food should be ‘cooked,’ and nothing is said regarding ‘eating.’
Further, the injunction that ‘the boy should fast for the rest of the
day’ shows that the boy undergoes the Initiatory rite *after breakfast*;
so that the actual *eating* of the food cannot be part of that rite.

‘*As much os way he needed*’;—*i.e*., just as much food as may be
necessary for the satisfaction of hunger; large quantities of food
should not be begged.

‘*Having offered it without guile to the Teacher*;’—*i.e*., he should
not show the teacher only the inferior articles of food, hiding with
these the superior ones, with the view that the Teacher would not take
any thing out of the inferior articles. The ‘*offering*’ consists of
presenting it to him, saying ‘this is what I have obtained.’

What the teacher does not take, ‘*he should eat*,’ after having been
permitted by the teacher to do so.

“Why should not the *offering* be regarded merely as an act producing in
the food some transcendental effect (and not as a real offering meant to
be accepted by the teacher)?”

That it is not so is proved by historical evidence: says the revered
Vyāsa in the story of *Hṛtakūpa*, where it is distinctly stated that the
teacher actually took what was offered.

That the boy should eat only after being permitted to do so, is laid
down in several *Gṛhyasūtras*.

‘*With his face to the east, after having sipped tenter*.’—Some people
have asserted that *the facing of the east* is meant to be connected
with the sipping of water,—the two being in close proximity. But this is
not right; as the rule regarding *sipping*—that it should be done with
the face towards the east or north,—will come later on. Hence what is
mentioned here is connected with the *eating*.

‘*Pure*.’—This means that after *rinsing the mouth* he should avoid,
during meals, such tilings as looking at the *Cāṇḍāla* going to unclean
places, spitting and so forth.—(51)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 936);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 454), which latter adds that in the event of the Teacher not
being near at hand, the food is to be offered to the Teacher’s wife or
son, or to his own companions,—in *Aparārka* (p. 60);—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 61), which explains ‘*Amāyayā*’ as that he should
not conceal the better quality of food obtained - out of fear that the
Teacher will take it for himself;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
113).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2.46-47.—‘Having offered it to the Teacher, he
should eat it when permitted; in the absence of the Teacher, he should
offer it to his wife or to his son or to his own fellow-students.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 454).—‘Morning and evening,
he shall eat food which is respected, never decried.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasutra*, 1.3.31-35.—‘Having collected it, he should
describe it to the Teacher; he should eat it on being permitted by him;
during the Teacher’s absence, he should offer it to the Teacher’s
family; during the absence of these also, to other Vedic scholars; he
should never beg alms for himself alone.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 11.37.1.—‘Food should be eaten, with face
towards the East.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.9.—‘Alms should be begged from qualified persons,
never from the Teacher’s family; the food obtained should be eaten only
with his permission.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.31.—‘Having done his duty to the Fires, he should eat
his food silently, with the Teacher’s permission, after having sipped
water.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.22.9.—‘he should offer it to the Teacher and
then rest during the rest of the day.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.8.—‘He offers the alms obtained to the
Teacher; and then he should rest (luring the rest of the day, with
speech controlled,—‘so say some.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.11.—‘He offers the food to the Teacher.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 20.2.0.—‘He should cat seated, facing the
East, not disparaging the food, with attention fixed thereon; and after
having eaten, he should touch fire.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 154).—‘He shall never receive more alms than
what would suffice for his meal; if he accepts more, he incurs the sin
of theft.’

*Gautama-Smṛti* (Do.).—‘In the absence of the Teacher, he shall seek the
permission (to eat) from the Teacher’s wife, or his son, or from his
fellow-students.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘The alms, examined, taken round the fire, shown to the
sun, offered to the Teacher and granted by him, is called *Nectar*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

051	Having collected as much food as is required (from several persons), and having announced it without guile to his teacher, let him eat, turning his face towards the east, and having purified himself by sipping water.
</details>
