+++
title = "052 आयुष्यम् प्राङ्-मुखो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Eating with face to the East, he does what is conducive to longevity; eating with face to the South, he does what brings fame; eating with face to the West, he does what brings prosperity; and eating with face to the North, he does what leads to the true.—(52)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निष्कामस्य प्राङ्मुखस्य भोजनं विहितं नित्यतया । इदानीं काम्या विधय उच्यन्ते । आयुषे हितं **आयुष्यं** **प्राङ्मुखो भुङ्क्त** इति । यदि तद्भोजनाद् आयुः प्राप्यते तत आयुष्यं तद् भवति, तेनायम् अर्थः संपद्यते- आयुष्कामः प्राङ्मुखो भुञ्जीत[^१९४] । अधिकारद्वयं प्राच्याम्, नित्यं काम्यं च । आयुष्कामः फलम् अभिसंदधीत । इतरस् तु न तथेति । यथा नित्यम् अग्निहोत्रम्, स्वर्गकामस्य चासकृत्प्रयोगात् तन्त्रेण फलकामस्य नित्यो ऽप्य् अधिकारो निर्वर्तते । एवं यशःकामो **दक्षिणामुखः** । इमे काम्या एव विधयः । **श्रियम्** इच्छन् । श्रियन् क्यजन्ताच्छता कृतः । श्रियै हितं वा श्रियम् इति मकारान्तः पाठः, आयुष्यादिवत् । प्राण्यङ्गत्वात् स्वार्थे भुजिर् वर्तते । तथा[^१९५] **ऋतं**[^१९६]** भुङ्क्त** इति । श्रियं भोजनात् प्राप्नोतीति । तथा च द्वितीयान्तः पाठः श्रियम् इति । तादर्थ्ये वा चतुर्थी "श्रियै प्रत्यग्" इति । **ऋतं** सत्यं यज्ञश् च, तत्फलं वा स्वर्गः । स्वर्गकाम उदङ्मुखो भुञ्जीत । अन्तरेणापि विधिप्रत्ययम् अप्राप्तत्वाद् विध्यर्थावगतिः पञ्चमलकारादिकल्पनया । एवम् एतद् दिग्विभागेन भोजनं फलविशेषार्थम् ।


[^१९६]:
     G 1st ed.: kṛtaṃ


[^१९५]:
     M: yathā


[^१९४]:
     G: bhuṅkte

- विदिग्भोजनं त्व् अर्थप्राप्तं नित्येन प्राङ्मुखतानियमेनापोद्यते । अयं च काम्यो विधिर् न ब्रह्मचारिण एव भैक्ष्यभोजनविषयः, अपि तु गृहस्थादीनाम् अपि भोजनमात्राश्रितः । तथा चाश्नीयाद् इति प्रकृते भुङ्क्त इत्य् आख्यातान्तरनिर्देशो लिङ्गम् । इतरथाश्नीयाद् इति यतो निःसंदिग्धा प्रकृतविषयता प्रतीयते तद् एव निरदैक्ष्यत् । भुङ्क्त इति तु निर्देशे किं प्रकृत एवार्थः शब्दान्तरेण निर्दिष्टः, उत शब्दार्थतया भोजनमात्रम् इति संदेहे आख्यातावृत्ताव् अर्थान्तरावगतिर् न प्रकृतप्रत्यभिज्ञानम् एव ।

- यत् तु विधिप्रत्ययाभावाद् अर्थवाद एवायं पूर्वशेष इति चोक्तः परिहारः वचनानि त्व् अपूर्वत्वाद् इति । न च पूर्वैकवाक्यताहेतुर् विभज्यमानसाकाङ्क्षत्वादिर् अस्ति । यद्य् अप्य् उत्तरेषां चैतद् अवरोधीत्य् अनेनातिदेशेन ब्रह्मचारिधर्मो ऽपि पुरुषमात्रविषयः स्यात् फलं तु न स्यात् । गुणकामनायां हि नातिदेशात् प्रवृत्तिम् अनुमन्यन्ते । "गोदोहनेन पशुकामस्य प्रणयेत्" (आश्श् १.१६.२), "खादिरं वीर्यकामस्य" (षड्ब् ४.४) इति विकृतेषु नेष्यते कैश्चित् ॥ २.५२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has laid down the general compulsory rule that the
boy should eat with his face to the East, if he is not desirous of
obtaining any peculiar results; the text is now laying down rules that
are to he observed with a view to definite desired ends.

‘*Āyuṣyam*’—is that which is conducive to longevity; and ‘*Eating with
face to the East, one does what is coducive to longevity*’; when the act
of eating brings about longevity, it becomes ‘*what is conducive to
longevity* ’; hence the meaning of the text comes to be that ‘if one
desires longevity he should eat with face to the East.’ Thus then, in
regard to the East, there are two directions—(*a*) one should *always*
face the East, and (*b*) one should do so when desiring the said result;
so that if a man desires longevity, he should actually have the
particular desire in view; while in the other case he should not have
any result in view. Just as, though the *Agnihotra* is an obligatory
act, yet if the man seeks heaven, he repeats its performance; and by so
doing he fulfills, incidentally, the obligations of the obligatory act
also.

Similarly, when one desires fame, he should face the South. All these
rules are optional.

*Desiring prosperity*—the form ‘*Shriyan*’ is formed by adding the
present participial affix ‘*śatṛ*’ to the nominal root formed by adding
‘*kyach*’ to the noun ‘*Śrī*’ Or, we may read ‘*Shriyam*’ ending in *m*;
the meaning being ‘*what brings prosperity*’; just as in the case of the
other words ‘*āyuṣyam*’ and the rest.

The use of the root ‘*bhuj*,’ ‘to eat,’ in its literal sense becomes
possible, if we regard ‘longevity’ and the rest as ‘parts of a living
being’; the same explanation applies also to the next clause ‘he eats
what leads to the true.’ The meaning thus comes to be that by‘eating
with face to the west one obtains prosperity.’ In this case we have the
reading ‘*shriyam*’ with the Accusative ending. Or, lastly we may read
‘*shriyai*,’ with the Dative ending, which would signify ‘for the sake
of.’

‘*True*’ means the *real*, and also the *sacrifice* or Heaven as
resulting from the sacrifice. The sense thus is that ‘if one seeks
heaven he should eat with his face to the north.’

Even though we have no Injunctive affixes in the text, yet, since what
is here laid down is something not already known, we take it in the
sense of an Injunction, construing the Present Tense as denoting the
*fifth* sense (*Leṭ*, which is expressive of Injunction).

Thus then we have this rule of eating with face to various directions,
with a view to various results.

Eating with face towards the subsidiary quarters, which one might be
tempted to do undor special circumstances, becomes precluded by the
obligatory injunction of facing the *East*, etc.

The optional rule here laid down does not apply only to the Religious
Student, nor to the eating of the food obtained by begging only, but to
all forms of eating by the Householder and others also. That this is so
is indicated by the fact that though in the context we have all along
had the Injunctive word ‘*aśnīyāt*,’ the present veise has used a
different word ‘*bhuṅkte*’; if the author had definitely intended the
present rule to be as restricted in its application as those that have
gone before, then he would have used the same word. When however we find
him making use of a different word, ‘*bhuṅkte*,’ we begin to doubt if
what is meant is the particular eating that has been hitherto dealt with
in the context, or a general rule applying to all forms of eating; and
the conclusion we are led to is that since a different verb is used, it
must stand for a different act, and it cannot be regarded as the same
that has been dealt with in the context.

Some people have argued that—“in as much as there is no injunctive word
in the present verse, it must be taken as merely laudatory of what has
gone before.” But this has been answered in *Mīmāmsā Sūtra* 3.5.21
(where it is asserted that sentences laying down things not already
known are to be regarded as *injunctive*). Nor do we find in the present
verse any such signs as would indicate that it is meant to be subsidiary
to the preceding verse,—such signs, for instance, as the fact of its
being wanting in some integral part, if taken apart from the preceding
verse, and so forth. It is possible to take the present verse as
referring primarily to the Religious Student only, and then to extend
its application to all men,—on the ground that what is laid down here is
not incompatible with the duties of ordinary men, as the other duties of
the Student are; but in that case the results mentioned in the verse
would not accrue to the ordinary man. For authoritative writers 8.1.23,
etc.) do not admit of activity by mere implied extension, in cases of
special results following from the use of special accessory details. If
such rules as ‘for one desiring cattle, water should be fetched in the
milking vessel,’ ‘the sacrificial post should be of *khadira* wood when
the man desires vigour,’ are never applied to the case of those
sacrifices which are mere ectypes (of the Darśapūrṇāmāsa); and to which
the details of the Darśapūrṇamāsa become applicable by extended
implication only.—(52)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ṛtam*’—‘Sacrifice,’ an alternative explanation suggested by,
Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa.

*Medhātithi* (p. 97, L 20)—‘*Guṇakāmanāyām* *hi*, &c.’

This refers to Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 8.1.23 *et. seq*.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, (p. 431) which remarks that the
verse refers to cases where a man makes it a rule to always face a
certain quarter at meals;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 34), which adḍs the
explanation that *śrīyam* and *ṛtam* are objects to the
present-participle ‘*icchan*’;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 377) in
support of the view that facing of the south is not interdicted when
done with a special motive. *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 324) also quotes the
verse to show that what is here prescribed applies to that eating which
is done with a special motive, the general law being that one should
face the east or the north .—*Aparārka* (p. 61) quotes the verse, and
adds the following explanation:—If one eats facing the east, it brings
longevity; one who eats facing the west, obtains prosperity; who eats
facing the north attains the truth or the sacrifice.—Thus eating with
face towards the east is both compulsory (as laid down in the preceding
verse) and optional, done with a special motive (as mentioned here).

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 115), which adds the
following notes—‘*āyuṣyam*’ means ‘conducive to longevity’—one who eats
facing the east obtains longevity; hence the meaning of the text is that
‘one who seeks for longevity should eat facing the east similarly
‘*yaśasyam*’ meaning conducive to fame’;—eating with face towards the
south brings fame—and similarly one who seeks for wealth should eat
facing the west, and he who seeks for ‘*ṛtā*’ *i. e*., the truth, should
eat facing the north.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 67. 40-41.—‘He should eat facing the East, or the South.’

*Gobhila* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 377).—‘The Brāhmaṇa may sit facing the
East, or the West; in connection with rites in honour of Pitṛs, even the
North; but the South he must avoid.’

*Mahābhārata* (Āśvamedhika-Parāśaramādhava, p. 395).—‘One shall eat with
wet feet, facing the East, with his two feet or even one touching the
ground.’

*Old Saying* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 309).—‘One should eat seated, facing
the east, with speech in check, not decrying the food, nor scattering
it, with mind concentrated on it: and having eaten he shall sip water.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

052	(His meal will procure) long life, if he eats facing the east; fame, if he turns to the south; prosperity, if he turns to the west; truthfulness, if he faces the east.
</details>
