+++
title = "053 उपस्पृश्य द्विजो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-b orn person should always take his food after having sipped water and with due care; and after having eaten, he should rinse his mouth in the proper manner and touch the cavities with water.—(53).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आचमनोपस्पृशतिशब्दौ समानार्थौ शुद्ध्यर्थसंस्कारविशेषवचनौ शिष्टव्यवहाराद् अवगम्येते । यद्य् उपस्पृशतिर् अर्थान्तरे पठितश् चमुर् अप्य् अदनमात्रे तथापि विशेष एव सोपसर्गयोः प्रयोगदर्शनात् तदर्थतैव प्रतीयते । स्पृशेः सामान्यविषयत्वे ऽपि प्रयोगो नियामकः । गडिर् वदनैकदेशे पठ्यते । स च कपोल एव गण्ड इति प्रयुज्यते, नैकदेशान्तरे । "पुष्यसिद्ध्यौ" (पाण् ३.१.११६) नक्षत्रमात्रे पठ्येते, विशेषे च वर्तेते । धाय्याशब्दः सामिधेनीमात्रे पठ्यते, आवापिकीषु च वर्तते । अतो ऽप एवाचम्येत्य् अर्थः । स एवोपस्पृश्येत्य् अस्यापि[^१९७] । स च परस्ताद् विधायिष्यते । सामानाधिकरण्यं चानयोर् दृश्यते नित्यकालम् उपस्पृशेद् इत्य् अभिधाय त्रिर् आचामेद् इत्य् आह । अतः समारार्थः । 


[^१९७]:
     M G omit: asyāpi

- उक्ते ऽप्य् आचम्येति भोजनार्थतयाचमने पुनर्वचनम् आनन्तर्यार्थम्, अनन्तरम् एव भुञ्जीत, न व्यापारान्तरेण व्यवदधीत । तथा च भगवान् व्यासः- 

- पञ्चार्द्रा भुञ्जते नित्यं तेषु वत्स्याम्य् अहं हरे ।

श्रीः किलैवम् आह । द्वौ हस्तौ द्वौ च पादाव् आस्यं च एषा पञ्चार्द्रता । सा[^१९८] चोपस्पर्शनान्तरं भुञ्जानस्य भवति, न विलम्बमानस्य । इहापि वक्ष्यत्य् "आर्द्रपादस् तु भुञ्जीत" (म्ध् ४.७६) इति स्नातकव्रतेषु । तस्यापौनरुक्त्यं च वक्ष्यामः । **नित्य**ग्रहणं प्रकरणाद् ब्रह्मचारीभोजनधर्मो[^१९९] मा विज्ञायि, भोजनमात्रधर्मो यथा स्याद् उपदेशत एव । 


[^१९९]:
     M G: brahmacārīdharmabhojanatā


[^१९८]:
     M G: yā

- <u>अत्र</u> **द्विज**ग्रहणं भोक्तृमात्रधर्मार्थं चाहुः नित्यग्रहणं चानुवादम् । <u>न ते</u> सम्यङ् मन्यन्ते । यदि द्विजशब्दः प्रकृते ब्रह्मचारिणि न समाविशेत् तदा स्याद् अपि । यदा तु तस्याप्य् एतद् अभिधानं तदा नान्तरेण नित्यग्रहणं प्रकरणबाधोपलभ्यते । 

- **समाहितः** । भुज्यमानं द्रव्यं स्वात्मशक्तिं चावेक्षमाणः । अन्यचेतस्कस्य हि गुरुविरुद्धविदाहिवर्जनं[^२००] सात्म्यभोजनं च न स्यात् । **भुक्त्वा चोपस्पृशेत्** । स्नेहादिलेपापनयनं द्रव्यशुद्धाव् उक्तम् । कृते तस्मिन् भुक्तवत इदम् आचमनं विधीयते ।


[^२००]:
     M G 1st ed.: -viruddhavādivarjanaṃ

- <u>अत्र केचिन्</u> मन्यन्ते शुद्ध्यर्थम् एकम् आचमनम्, "सुप्त्वा क्षुत्वा च भुक्त्वा च" (म्ध् ५.१४५) इति अनेनादृष्टार्थं द्वितीयं कर्तव्यम् । एवं च पठ्यते " आचान्तः पुनर् आचामेत्" (य्ध् १.१९६) इति । एतत् पञ्चमे स्थापयिष्यामः । 

- **सम्यग्** इति वैधताम् आचमनपदार्थस्यानुवदति । "यादृशो विधिर् उक्तस् तं सर्वम् अनुतिष्ठेत्" । **अद्भिः खानि च संस्पृशेत्** । खानि छिद्राणि शीर्षण्यानि । <u>ननु</u> चैतद् उक्तम् एव "खानि चैव स्पृशेद् अद्भिः" (म्ध् २.६०) इति । आत्मशिरसोर् व्यावृत्त्यर्थम् इति <u>केचित्</u> । यदा शुचिः सन्न् अभोजनार्थतयैवाचामति । येषां च भोजनोत्तरकालम् एकं शुद्ध्यर्थम् आचमनम् अपरम् अदृष्टार्थं तत्रादृष्टार्थ आत्मशिरसी न स्पृश्येते, शुद्ध्यर्थं तु तादृशम् उत्पन्नम् । तस्य संपूर्णाङ्गस्य प्रयोगो वक्ष्यते "शौचेप्सुः सर्वदाचामेत्" इति (म्ध् २.६१) । यद्[^२०१] वा विधिप्रत्यभिज्ञानार्थं शास्त्रीयम् एतद् आचमनं न लौकिकम् इति । ज्ञाताङ्गविशेषसंबन्धस्य तदङ्गिनिर्देशे तद् एवेदम् इति प्रत्यभिज्ञानसिद्धिः । अतश् च यत्राचामेद् इति श्रुतं तत्र न यस्य कस्यचिद् द्रव्यस्य भक्षणमात्रं प्रतीयते, किं तर्हि शास्त्रीयस्य संस्कारस्य सपरिकरस्येति यद् उक्तं तद् दर्शितं भवति ॥ २.५३ ॥


[^२०१]:
     M G: yadi
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The terms ‘*ācamana*’ and ‘*spṛśa*’ are both synonymous, being found
from the usage of cultured people, to signify a particular purificatory
act. Though it is true that the root ‘*spraha*’ has been declared to
have an entirely different meaning, and the root ‘*chamu*’ (from which
the word ‘*ācamana*’ is derived) also has been declared to signify the
act of *eating*,—yet in actual usage we find that with the particular
prefixes (*upa* and *a*) they are used in a much restricted sense and
hence they are taken in that (restricted) sense. So that even though the
root ‘*spṛśa*’ has a very wide denotation, yet actual usage limits its
significance. Just as though the root ‘*gaḍi*’ denotes only part of the
face in general, the term ‘*gaṇḍa*’ (derived from that root) is used in
the sense of tho *cheek* only, and it is not applied to any other part
of the face; similarly the root ‘*puṣya*’ means *to accomplish*, and the
term ‘*puṣya*’ is laid down as denoting ‘lunar, asterism’ in general,
yet in actual usage this latter name is applied to one particular
asterism only; similarly again the term ‘*dhāyyā*,’ though laid down as
denoting *Sāmidhenī* verses in general, is actually used in the sense of
the *Āvāpikī* verses only. Hence the term ‘*upaspṛśya*’ means exactly
what is meant by the term ‘*ācamya*’; the actual injunction of this act
of ‘*ācamana*’ will come later on. Further, the text itself uses the two
terms as synonymous. Having laid down that ‘one should always do the
*shana*,’ it goes on to say that ‘this *ācamana*’ should be done three
times; from which it is clear that the two are synonymous.

Though the ‘rinsing of the mouth’ has been already laid down in verse
51, it is re-iterated again in order to show immediate sequence: the
sense being that one should take his food *immediately after* rinsing
the mouth, and no other act should be allowed to intervene. To this end
we have the following declaration of the revered Vyāsa—‘Oh Lord, I shall
remain with such people as take their food with five limbs wet’—this
being said by Lakṣmī; the ‘five limbs’ being the two hands, two feet,
and month; and these five limbs can remain wet only if one cats
immediately after the rinsing, and not if he makes any delay. Manu
himself (in 4. 76) is going to declare under the duties of the Snātaka
that ‘one should eat with the feet still wet’; and there we shall show
that there is no needless repetition involved in this.

‘*Always*’—this is added in order to guard against the notion that being
laid down in the section dealing with the duties of the Student, what is
here prescribed applies to him alone; and to show directly that it is
applicable to every form of eating.

Some people have held that “the term ‘twice-born’ is what is meant to
make the rule applicable to every form of eating, and that the ‘always’
is merely an explanatory reiteration.”

This however is not right. This would have been the right explanation if
the qualification ‘twice-bom’ were incompatible with the ‘student’; as a
matter of fact however, the said qualification is quite applicable to
the ‘student’; hence with the exception of the adverb ‘always’ there is
nothing to indicate that what is here laid down is to be taken as going
beyond the particular context.

‘*With due care*’—That is, with due consideration of the character of
the food and his own (digestive) powers. If one happens to be
absent-minded, he cannot avoid indigestible, unwholesome and hot food,
nor can he eat only what is wholesome.

‘*After having eaten, he should rinse his mouth*.’—That one should
remove all traces of oil, etc., has been already prescribed under the
section on the ‘purification of substances.’ The ‘rinsing’ here laid
down is that which one should do after he has eaten and removed all
traces of oil, etc.

In this connection some people have held that one ‘rinsing’ (after food)
having been already laid down under 5. 145—where it is said that ‘one
should rinse his mouth after sleep, sneezing and eating,’—the present
verse must be taken as laying down a second ‘rinsing,’ for the purposes
of some transcendental result; there being such a general injunction as
‘having rinsed the mouth, one should rinse it again.’

This aspect of the question wo shall deal with under Discourse V.

*In the proper manner*.—This only re-iterates the injunctive and
obligatory character of the ‘rinsing’; the meaning being that ‘one
should follow all the details of the Binning that have been enjoined.’

‘*Should touch with water the cavities*.’—‘Cavities,’ *i.e*., holes in
the head.

*Objection*.—“It is already laid down (under 60, below) that the
cavities should be touched with water.”

To this some people reply that the repetition in the present verse is
meant to exclude the ‘self’ and ‘head’ (which also are mentioned along
with the ‘cavities’ in 60),—and refers to that rinsing which one already
clean, does, without reference to *Eating*. So that according to those
who take the first ‘rinsing’ after food as meant for cleanliness and a
second ‘rinsing’ as lending to some transcendental result,—the ‘self’
and the ‘head’ are not ‘touched with water’ for the purpose of bringing
about a transcendental result; this being done for cleanliness alone.
The actual process of this rinsing is going to he laid down in 61.—‘One
desirous of cleanliness should always rinse his mouth, etc., etc..’

Another answer to the aforesaid objection is that what the present verse
does is to emphasise the fact of the being recognised as something
enjoined by the scriptures; the sense being that this *Rinsing* is the
*scriptural* (prescribed in the Śāstras), not the *ordinary*, rinsing.
As a matter of fact, where a certain primary act has become known as
equipped with particular accessories, wherever that same act is
subsequently spoken of, it is at once recognised as being the same as
the former one. So that when the text says ‘*should rinse his mouth*,’
it does not mean merely that a certain substance (water) should be
sipped; what is meant is to indicate all that has been prescribed in
connection with the scriptural purification, along with its appurtenent
details.—(53)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Nityam*’—This, according to Govindarāja, Kullūka Nārāyaṇa and Nandana
indicates that the rule refers to householders also. The first half of
this verse has been quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 327).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 6 7.34-35.—‘One should cat without wetted feet or without
wetted hands and mouth.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtṛa*, 2.48.—‘While eating, he should keep silent,
contented, not greedy; and he should keep water near him; he should
touch with water the holes in his head.’

*Baudhāyana-Dhaṛmasūtra*, 5.1.21—‘Touching the holes with water, as also
the feet, the head and the left hand.’

*Āpastamba-Dhaṛmasūtra*, 1.5.2.—‘When going to eat, he should carefully
sip water twice, he should wash twice and should sprinkle water once.’

*Old Saying* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 309).—(See above.) *Gadya-Vyāsa* (Do.,
p. 378).—‘Being satisfied, he shall sip water with the mantra
*amṛtāpidhānamasi*, and moving a little from that place, he shall rinse
his mouth in due form.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Having eaten, he shall wash in due form, cleansing his
mouth and hands by rubbing with clay.’

*Gautama* (Do.).—‘At the time of rinsing the mouth, if one rubs it with
the forefinger, the foolish man falls into the *Raurava* hell.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.). ‘Having washed his hand, if the foolish man drinks the
water taken for rinsing, he degrades the gods, his Pitṛs and himself.
One shall not wash in the vessel in which he has eaten. If he rises from
his seat before, washing, he should bathe at once.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 379).—‘He shall sip water with the
mantra *amṛtāpidhānamasi*; having sipped water, he shall wash again,
with the mantra *Āyaṅgauḥ*, *etc*

*Āpastamba* (Aparārka, p. 61).—‘Having eaten, he shall wash himself,
without any mantra.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

053	Let a twice-born man always eat his food with concentrated mind, after performing an ablution; and after he has eaten, let him duly cleanse himself with water and sprinkle the cavities (of his head).
</details>
