+++
title = "056 नोच्छिष्टङ् कस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should not give the leavings to anyone; he should not eat in between; he should not do over-rating; and he should not go any-where with particles of food still on him.—(56)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पात्रीस्थम् अन्नम् आस्यस्पर्शदूषितम् **उच्छिष्टम्** उच्यते । तन् **न कस्यचिद् दद्याद्** अनेनैव सिद्धे स्नातकव्रतेषु यः शूद्रविषयः प्रतिषेधः स तत्रैव निरूपयिष्यते । चतुर्थ्यां प्राप्तायां षष्ठी संबन्धमात्रनिषेधार्था । ये ऽपि दत्तम् इदम् अस्मभ्यम् इति न विदुस् तेषाम् अपि भोजनाय न[^२०५] प्रकल्प्यं[^२०६] श्वबिडालादीनाम् । न ह्य् अत्र ददात्यर्थः परिपूर्णः[^२०७] स्वत्वनिवृत्तिमात्रं दातुः, परस्य स्वत्वापत्तिर्[^२०८] नास्ति । 


[^२०८]:
     M G J: satvāpattir; my reading is conjectural, and based also on Jha's translation of this sentence.


[^२०७]:
     M G: paripūrṇa


[^२०६]:
     M G 1st ed.: prakalpaṃ


[^२०५]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na

- **अन्तरा**शब्दो मध्यवचनः । द्वौ भोजनकालौ सायं प्रातश् च । ततो ऽन्यस्मिन् काले न भुञ्जीत । अथ वा व्यवधाने **अन्तरा**शब्दः । त्यक्तभोजनव्यापारः क्रियान्तरेण व्यवधाय पुनस् तद् एव प्राक्पात्रगृहीतं न भुञ्जीत । स्मृत्यन्तरे तु विशेषः पठ्यते- "उत्थानाचमनव्यापेतम्" इति (च्ड़्। ग्ध् १७.१९) । केचित् तु विच्छेदम् अन्तरम् आचक्षते । "सव्येन पाणिना पात्रम् अन्वालभ्य दक्षिणेनावदाय प्राणायास्ये जुहोति" इति श्रूयते । तत्र यः सव्येन पात्रस्यानुग्रहस् तदनन्तरम् । 

- **न चैवात्यशनम्** अतिमात्रम् अशनं **कुर्यात्** । एतच् चानारोग्यकारणं गुरुविरुद्धादीनां प्रदर्शनार्थम् । हेतूपदेशान् मात्राशितायाश् चायुर्वेदाद् अतिमात्रता बोद्धव्या । यावद् अशितम् अन्नम् उदरपूरं न करोति सम्यग् जीर्यति तावद् अशितव्यम् । त्रयः कुक्षेर् भागाः, अध्यर्धम् अन्नस्य भागार्धं पानस्य भागो दोषसंचाराय । अन्यथानारोग्यम् । 

- **न चोच्छित्ष्टः क्वचिद् व्रजेत्** । अतश् चोच्छिष्टम् अपनीय शुचित्वम् आपादिते तस्मिन्न् एव देश आचान्तव्यम् ॥ २.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The food left in the dish, and become unclean by being touched with the
mouth, is called, ‘*leavings*;’—this he should not give to anyone. The
prohibition of the offering of the leavings to any person being already
contained in this verse, the necessity of having another prohibition of
the offering of the leavings to a *Śūdra*,—which we find among the
duties of the *Snātakā*—we shall explain in connection with the latter
verse.

\[In ‘*Kasyachit*’ \] though the dative would he the proper form, we
have the genitive in the sense of ‘relationship in general,’ and what is
meant is that it should not he given even to such living beings as do
not understand that a certain thing has been given to them,—such for
instance, as dogs and cats; in this latter case the act cannot he called
‘*giving*’ in its full sense; as it involves merely the cessation of the
proprietary right of the giver, it does not involve the producing of the
proprietary right in the recipient \[that is why the Dative could not he
rightly used: which could imply both *giving* and *receiving* \].

The phrase ‘*antarā*’ ‘*in between*,’ means *middle*. There are two
times for meals—morning and evening; and one should not eat between
these meals. Or, ‘*in* *between*’ may mean *interruption*; in which case
the meaning is that ‘having once left off the act of eating, and having
interrupted it by some other act, he should not eat the food left in the
same dish.’ Another *Smṛti* lays down the specific rule that ‘one should
avoid eating interrupted by rising and washing.’ Others again have
explained the phrase ‘*antarā*,’ as meaning *disconnection*. The *Śruti*
having declared that ‘holding the dish with the left hand, ono should
take up the morsel with the right hand and then offer it to the
Life-breath in the mouth,’—it is the *omitting of the act of holding the
dish with the left hand* which is meant by the terms ‘*antarā*.’

‘*Be should not do over-eating*’;—one should not eat too much. This is
with a view to health, and hence implies the avoidance of such food as
may he either indigestible or unsuitable. Specially because the advice
is based upon reason. What is ‘*over-eating*’ can he learnt from the
Āyurveda. The sense is that one should eat only that quantity of food
which does not quite fill the stomach, and which is properly digested.
Of the three parts into which the stomach is divided, one part itself
should bo filled with food, half a part with water, and one part should
be left for the action of the bodily humours. If this is not done,
health suffers.

‘*He should not go anywhere teiṭh particles of food still on him*’;—on
the very spot where he has oaten, he should clean himself by removing
all particles of food from the body and then wash his hands and mouth
without rising from the place.—(50)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The second half of this verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
458); in *Aparārka* (p. 61) in support of the view that by avoiding
over-eating one acquires health;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
115).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verse 56-57)  
**

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 3. 36-10.—‘After eating, he should himself
wash the dish; he should not have any leavings; what he does not eat he
should bury in the ground; or throw into water.’

*Āpastamba*, 1. 11- 31. 22.—‘He should not offer the leavings to a
non-Brāhmaṇa.’

*Āpastamba*, 2.1.2-3.—‘He should eat twice; never satiating himself with
food.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 61).—‘For the ascetic the meal should consist
of eight morsels, for the hermit, sixteen, for the householder,
thirty-two; for the student, there is no limit.’

\[This same text is quoted in Parāśaramādhava, p. 370, as from
Āpastamba. \]

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 17.—‘Leavings or no leavings,—he should not offer the food
to a Śūdra.’

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 11.17.—‘Leavings, except those of the Teacher, should never
be eaten; nor one’s own leavings.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 7. 17. 12.—‘He should not. offer the
leavings to any one who does not possess the necessary qualifications.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 67. 36.—‘One should not eat clarified butter, with mouth
unclean.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 2. 37.—‘Leavings should he avoided.’

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 61).—‘Eating in the morning and in the evening
has been prescribed for men, by the gods; one shall not eat in between
these two meals; this practice is equal to the Agnihotra.’

*Mahābhārata*. (Aśvamedhika-Parāśaramādhava, p. 370).—‘One should never
overeat himself, nor eat too little.’

*Pulastya* (Do.). One shall never eat all that is served to him, except
curd, butter, fruits, milk, honey, and *sattu*.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do., p. 372).—‘He shall not leave food needlessly; he
shall not go anywhere with particles of food still on him.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2.47.—‘\[He should eat\] contentedly. not
greedily.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 371).—‘Morning and evening,
he shall eat food, which has been worshipped, without decrying it.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

056	Let him not give to any man what he leaves, and beware of eating between (the two meal-times); let him not over-eat himself, nor go anywhere without having purified himself (after his meal).
</details>
