+++
title = "058 ब्राह्मेण विप्रस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Every time, the Brāhmana should sip water, either though the receptacle dedicated to Brahmā, or through that dedicated to Prajāpati, or through that dedicated to the ‘Thrice-ten’ (Gods); but never through that dedicated to the Pitṛs.—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तीर्थ**शब्देन पवित्रम् उदकाधिकरणम् उच्यते । तारणाय पापप्रमोचनाय च तिष्ठतीति तीर्थम् । क्वचित् तु तरन्त्य् अनेनेति तीर्थम् उदकावतरणमार्गः । इह तूदकाधारकरतलैकदेश उच्यते । स्तुत्या वा तीर्थशब्दप्रयोगः । न हि तत्र नित्यस्था आपः । तेन **उपस्पृशेद्** आचामेत् । **ब्राह्मेणेत्य्** एतद् अपि स्तुत्यर्थम् एव । ब्रह्मा देवतास्येति । न हि तीर्थस्य देवता भवत्य् अयागरूपत्वाद् अमन्त्रत्वाच् च । यागरूपतां च केनचिद् धर्मेण शुद्धिहेतुत्वादिनाध्यारोप्य देवतातद्धितः । **नित्यकालं** शौचार्थे कर्माङ्गे च । **कः** प्रजापतिः, स देवतास्येति **कायम्** । एवं त्रिदशा देवता अस्येति **त्रैदशिकम्** । त्रिदशशब्दाद् देवताणिकृते स्वार्थे कः । देवतात्वं च पूर्ववत् । एभिस् तीर्थैर् **उपस्पृशेत्** । **विप्र**ग्रहणम् अविवक्षितम् । यतः क्षत्रियादीनं विशेषं वक्ष्यति । न चासत्यां सामान्यतः प्राप्तौ विशेषविधानम् उपपद्यते, "कण्ठगाभिस् तु भूमिपः" (म्ध् २.६२) इत्यादि । **न पित्र्येण** पितृदैवत्येन **कदाचिद्** अपि । स्फोटपिटकादिना ब्राह्मादितीर्थेष्व् अयोग्यताम् आयातेष्व् अपि ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाविधानाद्[^२१०] एव पित्र्यस्याप्राप्तिः । <u>अस्त्य्</u> अत्राशङ्का । पितृतीर्थज्ञापनार्थं तावत् पित्र्यं तयोर् अध[^२११] इत्य् अवश्यं वक्तव्यम् । न च तस्येह कार्यं निर्दिश्यते । कार्याकाङ्क्षायां[^२१२] प्रकृतत्वात् तेन कार्येण संबन्ध आशङ्क्येत । अद्य पुनः प्रतिषेधे सति पित्र्यम् इति समाख्ययैव कार्यावगतिः, उदकतर्पणादि पितृकर्म एतेन तीर्थेन कर्तव्यम् । एवं स्तुतिर् अन्वयिनी भवति । श्रुतिनोदितत्वाच् च ब्राह्मादीनां तदभावे प्राप्ताशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थं युक्तम् अस्याभिधानम् ॥ २.५८ ॥


[^२१२]:
     M G: -kāṅkṣāya


[^२११]:
     M G omit: adha


[^२१०]:
     M G 1st ed.: cāvidhānavad
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*tīrtha*,’ ‘Receptacle,’ means a clean vessel containing
water; ‘*tīrtha*’ (literally) is that which exists for the purpose of
saving people, *i.e*., freeing them from their sins. In some places
‘*tīrtha*’ is explained as ‘that by which people descend into water.’ In
the present context however it stands for that part of the palm of the
hand which contains water; and we must take the word ‘*tīrtha*’ as
applied to the hand, with a view to eulogise it, only figuratively; for
water does not remain in the hand always (and as such it cannot be
called *tīrtha* in its literal sense).

Through the said receptacle, *he should sip water*.

‘*Dedicated to Brahmā*’;—this also is a figurative eulogy. The term
means ‘that of which Brahmā is the deity’; and certainly the said
‘Receptacle,’ not being of the nature of a ‘sacrifice,’ or of a
‘Mantra,’ could not be said to be ‘dedicated to a deity.’ The special
nominal affix in the word ‘*brāhma*,’ which denotes ‘dedication to a
deity,’ may however be justified on the assumption that the said
receptacle resembles a ‘sacrifice’ in certain characteristics, such as
being the means of sanctification and so forth.

‘*Every time*’—*i.e*., for the purposes of cleanliness, as also as part
of religious performances.

‘*Kāya*’—‘Ka’ stands for Prajāpati: hence ‘*kāya*’ is that which is
dedicated to Prajāpati.

Similarly that which is dedicated to the ‘thrice-ten’—*i.e*., the
Gods—is called the ‘*traidaśikam*.’ The word ‘*traidaśikam*’ is derived
from ‘*tridaśa*’ with the deifìc affix ‘*aṇ*,’ and then the reflexive
‘*ka*.’ And the deific character in this case also is of the same kind
as before (in the term ‘*brāhma*’).

Through these receptacles one should sip water. The mention of the
*Brāhmaṇa* (Vipra) is not meant to be significant here. For special
rules for the *Kṣatriya*, etc., are going to be added later on (in verse
62, *et seq*.); and unless we had a general rule, there could he no room
for specifications \[and it is the present verse alone that could be
taken as formulating that general rule, and hence it could not be taken
as restricted to. the Brāhmaṇa only.\]

‘*Not through that dedicated to the* *Pitṛs*’—*i.e*., never through that
of which the Pitṛs are the deity; even in cases where the aforesaid
parts of the hand are disabled by the presence of boils and pimples.

*Objection*.—“The mere fact of *what is sacred to Pitṛs* not having been
enjoined makes it impossible to be used (why should the negation be
re-iterated)?”

*Answer*.—There is one danger in that: The next verse supplies the
description of ‘the receptacle dedicated to Pitṛs’; while there is no
use for it laid down in the present context; so that when one would
proceed to seek for the use to which this particular receptacle could
lie put, he might form the idea that it is to be used in connection with
the act (*of sipping water*) that forms the subject-matter of the
context. When, h owever, wc have the direct prohibition (of this
receptacle, in connection with *water-sipping*), we gather the use for
it from its very name, and conclude that the offering of water and such
other rites for the *Pitṛs* are to be performed with ‘the receptacle
dedicated to Pitṛs.’ In this manner the eulogy also becomes consistent.
The ‘receptacles’ dedicated to Brahmā and the rest being directly
enjoined as those to be used, people might be led into the mistake that
in the absence of these the other may be used; hence with a view to
prevent this it was only right to mention the *Pitrya-tīrtha* also (as
that which should never be used).—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 76), where it is
noted that according to Hemādri, the term ‘*vipra*’ stands for all the
three twice-born castes, on the ground that Yājñavalkya’s text bearing
on the subject uses the generic term ‘*dvija*—but this view is
controverted on the ground that it is more reasonable to take, on the
strength of Manu’s use of the particular term ‘*vipra*,’ the term
‘*dvija*’ of Yājñavalkya’s text as standing for the Brāhmaṇa only,
rather than the other way about; as in this there is no stretching of
the term ‘*dvija*’ which is often used for the Brāhmaṇa only; while in
the other case the natural meaning of the term ‘*vipra*’ is unduly
extended to other than Brāhmaṇas. The writer goes on to quote
Medhātithi’s words (p. 100, 11.20-21)—“The mention of the *Vipra* is not
meant to be significant here. For special rules for the Kṣatriya etc.,
are going to be added later on (in verse 62, *et seq*), and unless we
had a general rule there could be no room for specifications; \[and it
is the present verse alone that could be taken as formulating that
general rule, and hence it could not be taken as restricted to the
Brāhmaṇa only.”\] (*Translation* pp. 306-307);—and traverses this
argument, on the ground that the present text is not injunctive of
*Ācamana*, and hence the special rule that follows in verse 62 regarding
*ācamana* can have no bearing upon this verse; the real injunction of
*Ācamana* is contained in verse 61. Verse 58, therefore, it is
concluded, must be taken only as enjoining a particular ‘*tīrtha*’ for
the Brāhmaṇa.

Proceeding with the explanation of the verse, *Vīramitrodaya*
adds—‘*nityakālam*’ meaning *always*; so that whenever *ācamana* has got
to be done, it should be done by the Brāhmaṇa by anyone of the thfee
methods herein described; and it adds that such is the ‘*svarasa*,’
‘inclination,’ of Medhātithi also, which clearly refers to Medhātithi,
p. 100, 1. 22. It goes on to point out, however, that the view of many
Digests is that *as far as possible* the *Brāhmatīrtha* should be
used.,—such being the implication of the qualification ‘*nityakālam*,’
which is more nearly related to the first option; and the other
alternatives are to be taken up only when the *Brahma tīrtha* is
disabled.—‘*Kāya*’ means ‘dedicated to Prajāpati,’ and ‘*Traidaśika*,’
‘dedicated to the gods.’

It goes on to add that, though there was no possibility for the ‘*Pitrya
tīrtha*’ to be employed,—it not being mentioned among those
sanctioned,—yet it has been specially interdicted with a view to
indicate that the *Pitryatīrtha* is never to be used, not even when
every one of the three *tīrthas* permitted is impossible, through
pimples and sores: so that in such emergencies, the *tīrtha* to be
employed would be the *Āgneya* and others.

This verse is quoted in *Nityāchārapradīpa* (p. 64 and p. 253), which
notes that ‘*Kāyatraidaśikabhyām*’ is the secondary alternative
mentioned in view of the contingency of there being a wound or some
incapacity in the ‘*Brāhmatīrtha*;—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 339), which
has the following note—‘*Kāya*’ is *Prājāpatya*; ‘*Traidaśika*’ is
*Daiva*; ‘*nityakālam*’ indicates that the second and third alternatives
are to be resorted to only in the event of the using of the first being
impossible;—in *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 20), which explains *traidaśikam*’ as
*daivam*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 311), which connects the negative
particle ‘*na*’ with the whole of the second line, and explains
‘*brāhma*’ as the base of the *aṅguṣṭha*, ‘*kāya*’ as *prājāpatya*, the
base of the little finger, ‘*traidaśika*’ as *daiva*, the tip of the
fingers, and ‘*pitrya*’ the base of the index finger;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā. p. 77), which quotes ‘Medhātithis’
explanation of the derivation of the term ‘*traidaśikam*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 58-59)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha-Sṃṛti*, 3. 29.—‘The line beyond the base of the thumb is the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; through that one should sip water thrice and then wash
with water.’

*Viṣṇu-Sṃṛti*, 62. 6.—‘He should sip water through the *Brahma-tīrtha*.’

*Yajñavalkya*, 1.18.—‘With hands between his knees, seated on a pure
spot, facing the north or the east, the twice-born should sip water.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 5. 11.—‘One should sip water through the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 5. 1. 12-13.—‘The base of the thumb is the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; the tip of the thumb is the *Pitrya-tīrtha*; the tips
of the fingers, the *Daiva-tīrtha*; the base of the fingers, the
*Ārṣa-tīrtha*; the *Pitrya-tīrtha* is also that between the thumb and
the forefinger.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62.1-4.—‘For the twice born, the base of the little
finger is the**Prājāpatya*-tīrtha*; at the base of the thumb, the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; at the tip of the fingers, the *Daiva*; at the base of
the forefinger, the *Pitrya*.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.19.—‘The base of the little finger, the base of the
forefinger, the base of the thumb, and the tip of the fingers of the
hand constitute the *Prājāpatya, Pitrya, Brahma* and *Daiva* tīrthas
respectively.’

*Śaṅkha* (quoted in Medhātithi).—‘The *Kāya* is at the base of the
little finger; the *Prājāpatya* at the base of the thumb, the *Daiva*,
at the tips of the fingers; the *Pitrya*, at the base of the
index-finger.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 221).—‘The *Brahmatīrtha* is
situated to the left of the thumb, on the line pointing upwards; the
*Pitrya* between the thumb and the index finger; the *Prājāpatya*
between the palm and the little index: on the top of the finger tips,
the *Daiva*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

058	Let a Brahmana always sip water out of the part of the hand (tirtha) sacred to Brahman, or out of that sacred to Ka (Pragapati), or out of (that) sacred to the gods, never out of that sacred to the manes.
</details>
