+++
title = "060 त्रिर् आचामेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

First of all he should sip water thrice; then he should wipe his mouth twice, and touch with water the cavities, the soul and also the head.—(60)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अन्यतमेन तीर्थेन **त्रिर् अप** उदकम् **आचामेद्** आस्येन जठरं प्रवेशयेत् । **तत** उदकभक्षणान्तरं **द्विर्** अभ्यासेन **मुखम्** ओष्ठद्वयं **परिमृज्यात्** । ओष्ठश्लिष्टानाम् उदकावयवानां सोदकेन हस्तेनापनयनं **प्रमार्जनम्** अत्र । <u>कुतः</u> पुनर् हस्तेनेति । <u>समाचारात्</u> तीर्थाधिकाराद् वा । तीर्थेनैवाद्भिर् इति चोत्तरत्र श्रुतम् अत्राप्य् अपकृष्यते । दृष्टर्थत्वाच् च प्रमार्जनस्य मुखशब्द एकदेशे यथोक्ते वर्तते । **खानि** छिद्राणि चोपस्पृशेद् **अद्भिर्** हस्तगृहीताभिः स्पर्शनम् एवोपस्पर्शनम् । मुखस्य च प्रकृतत्वान् मुख्यानाम् एव खानाम् एष स्पर्शनविधिः । गौतमश् चाह- "खानि चोपस्पृशेच् छीर्षण्यानि" (ग्ध् १.३६) । **आत्मानम्** इति हृदयं नाभिं वा निर्दिशति । उपनिषत्सु हि "अन्तर्हृदयम् आत्मानं पश्येत्" इति कथ्यते । अतो हृदयस्यायं स्पर्शः क्षेत्रज्ञस्यात्मनो विभोः । अमूर्तस्य न स्पर्शसंभवः । "नाभिम् आलभेत" (आश्श् १.१३.१) इति क्वचित् स्मर्यते, तेन नाभिं मन्यामहे । **शिरः** प्रसिद्धम् । स्मृतीनां चैकार्थ्यात् "आ मणिबन्धात् पाणी प्रक्षाल्य" (ग्ध् १.३६) इत्य् एवमादि लभ्यते । तथा अशब्दकरणं वाङ्नियमः पादाभ्युक्षणम् । महाभारते प्रक्षालनम् अपि पादयोर् दर्शितम् ॥ २.६० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Through any one of the aforesaid ‘receptacles’ he should three times
‘*sip water*,’—*i.e*., he should let water enter his stomach through the
mouth.

‘*Then*’—*i.e*., after the sipping of water,—he should ‘*twice*’—*i.e*.,
by repeating the act—‘*wipe the mouth,’—i.e*., the two lips. This
‘*wiping*’ consists of removing with a wet hand the drops of water
attaching to the lips.

*Question*.—“Whence do you get the idea that this wiping is to be done
*with the hand?*”

*Answer*.—We learn this from actual usage, and also deduce it from the
fact of the context dealing with ‘receptacles’ (which have been
described as parts of the band);—the terms ‘through the receptacle’ and
‘with vrater,’ though occurring elsewhere, being brought in here also.

Further, inasmuch as the *wiping* is meant only to serve a visible
purpose, the term ‘mouth’ is taken to stand for a part of the mouth
(*i.e*., the lips).

‘*Cavities*’—holes;—‘*he should touch with water*’—hold in the hand.
‘*Upasparśana*’ (of the text) is the same as ‘*sparśana*.’ Since the
text has been speaking of the ‘*mouth*,’ the ‘cavities’ meant to be
touched are those pertaining to the mouth (*i.e*., located in the bead).
Says Gautama (1.36)—‘He should touch the cavities *in the head*.’

‘*The Soul*’—stands for the Heart and the Navel. In the Upaniṣads we
read that ‘one should And the Soul in the heart.’ Hence the ‘touching of
the heart’ becomes the ‘touching of the Soul,’ the all-pervading entity
ensouling the body. (We have to take it in this sense, because) there
can be no *touching* of the Soul itself, which is something incorporeal.
In some law-books it is laid down that ‘one should touch the navel’;
hence we have included ‘navel’ also (as indicated by the term ‘Soul’ of
the text).

‘*Head*’—this is well known.

Since all *Smṛtis* arc meant to serve the same purpose, ‘the washing of
hands up to the wrists’ and such other acts (as are laid down in Gauṭama
1.36, for instance) also hare to be done along with those mentioned in
the text; such acts, for instance, as *not making noise*, *keeping
silent, sprinkling of water on the feet*,—or even *washing* the feet, as
laid down in the *Mahābhārata*.—(60)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 101, l, 21)—‘*Kvachit smaryate*’—Hopkins refers in this
connection to *Mahābhārata* 13.104.39.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 178);—and in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 992), which adds the following notes:—‘*Mukham*,’ the two
lips,—the whole for the part,—the ‘holes’ to be touched also are those
connected with the *face*, *mukha*;—‘*ātmānam*,’ heart or navel,—the
Upaniṣads describing the ‘*ātman*’ as ‘to be seen within the
heart,’—hence the ‘touching’ is to be of the heart, as the ‘Soul,’ being
all-pervading, cannot be touched;—the touching of the *navel* also is
laid down in other texts—\[Hence ‘*ātmānam* may stand for either the
*heart* or the *navel*. \]
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bodhāyava-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.15-10.—‘Thrice he should sip water,
reaching to the heart,—not laughing, not talking, not standing, not
looking this way and that, not stooping, not bowing down, not having his
*śikhā* untied, with throat not covered, nor with head covered, not in a
hurry, not without the sacred thread, not spreading out his feet, with
the end of his lower garment not tucked into the waist-band, with arms
not outside the knees, without making any sound; and he should wash
thrice; twice, according to some.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.21.—‘Touching the holes with water, he
should touch the feet, navel, head, and lastly, the left hand.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, l.38-42.—‘Seated on a clean spot, placing his
right arm between his knees, wearing the sacred thread, washing his
hands up to the wrist, with speech in check, he should sip water,
touching the heart, thrice or four times; he should wash twice; the feet
also; should touch the holes in the head; should sprinkle water on the
heart also.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.10. 2-9.—‘Seated, he should sip water
twice, reaching his heart; should wash the lips thrice—twice, say some;
once he should rinse his mouth,—twice, say some; washing the left hand
with the right, he should touch with water, the feet, the head, the
sense-organs, the eyes, the nostrils and the ears; then he should touch
water; when going to take food, he should, even though clean, sip water
twice, twice wash his lips and once rinse the mouth; he should sip water
alter having washed the lips to the ends.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 3.29-30.—‘With the *Brahma-tīrtha*, he should thrice
sip water and twice wash the lips with water; should touch the holes
with water; should sprinkle water on the head.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62,6-8.—‘With the *Brahma-tīrtha*, he should sip water
thrice; twice wash; touch with water the holes, the head and the chest.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5-8.—‘Going to the north of the Fire, washing
his hands, seated, he should sip water thrice, and wash twice; having
sprinkled water over the feet, he should sprinkle it over the head;
touch the organs with water; the eyes, the nostrils and the ears.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1-20.—‘Having sipped water thrice and washed twice, he
should touch the holes with water in its natural condition.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

060	Let him first sip water thrice; next twice wipe his mouth; and, lastly, touch with water the cavities (of the head), (the seat of) the soul and the head.
</details>
