+++
title = "061 अनुष्णाभिर् अफेनाभिर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One who knows his duties, when desiring cleanliness, should always sip, through the proper receptacle, water which is neither hot nor frothy,—in solitude, with his face towards the North or the East.—(61)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उष्ण**शब्दः क्वाथोपलक्षणार्थः । तथा हि पट्ःयते- "अशृताभिर् अद्भिः" इति । एवं च ग्रीष्मोष्मतप्ताः स्वभावोष्णाश् च न प्रतिषिध्यन्ते । **फेन**ग्रहणं बुद्बुदानाम् अपि प्रदर्शनार्थम् । पठितं च "हीनाभिः फेनबुद्बुदैः" (य्ध् १.२०) इति । **तीर्थेन धर्मविद्** इति वृत्तपूरणम् एव । शौचम् आप्तुम् इच्छुः **शौचेप्सुः** । शुद्धिकाम इत्य् अर्थः । नान्यथा शुद्धो भवति । **सर्वदा** । न प्रकरणाद् भोजन एव । किं तर्हि, न रेतोविण्मूत्रादिशुद्धिष्व्[^२१७] अपि । अपां भक्षणे कर्मत्वात् तृतीयानिर्देशः, न भक्षमाणानाम् एवायं धर्मः, अपि तु कारणभूतानाम् अपि पादाभ्युक्षणादौ । वयं तु ब्रूमो भक्षणे ऽपि करणम् एवापो न हि तासाम् आचमनं संस्कारः । **एकान्ते** शुचौ देशे । एकान्तो हि जनैर् अनाकीर्णः प्रायेण शुचिर् भवति ।


[^२१७]:
     M G 1st ed.: netaro viṇmūtrādi-

- **प्रगुदङ्मुखः** । मुखशब्दः प्रत्येकम् अभिसंबध्यते । "प्राङ्मुख उदङ्मुखो वा " एवं हि गौतमेन पठितम् (ग्ध् १.३५) । विग्रहश् चैवं कर्तव्यः प्रागुदङ्मुखम् अस्येति । नायं द्वंद्वगर्भो बहुव्रीहिः, अपि तु बहुव्रीहिर् एव । द्वंद्वगर्भतायां समाहारे समासान्तेनाकारेण भवितव्यम् । इतरेतरयोगो ऽपि नैव । न हि युगपद् उभयदिङ्मुखता संभवति । तत्र कश्चिद् आचमनभागः प्राङ्मुखेन कर्तव्यः कश्चिद् उदङ्मुखेनेत्य् आपतति, न चैकदेश आचमनम् । न च दिगर्थ उपादेयो येन परस्परापेक्षे संबध्येयाताम् । नापि दक्षिणपूर्वादिवत् प्रागुदक्शब्दो ऽपराजिताया दिशो वाचकत्वेन् प्रसिद्धो येन दिक्समासबहुव्रीहिर् ज्ञायते । तस्मान् नायं वृत्त्यन्तरगर्भो बहुव्रीहिः । अतो विकल्पः । उदाहृतं च स्मृत्यन्तरे- "प्राङ्मुख उदङ्मुखो वा शौचम् आरभेत" इति (ग्ध् १.३५) । यथा "बृहद्रथन्तरसाम षडहे" इति केषुचिद् अहःसु[^२१८] बृहत् केषुचिद् रथन्तरम्, न त्व् एकस्मिन्न् अहनि समस्तोभयसामत्वम् । २.६१ ॥


[^२१८]:
     M G: aharahaḥsu

_उक्तम् आचमनं तीर्थेनापां भक्षणम् । परिमाणं तु नोक्तम् । अतस् तद् अवधारणार्थम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Hot*’ hero stands for boiled; elsewhere we read that the sipping
should be done ‘with unboiled water.’ So that the prohibition docs not
apply to such water as is naturally hot, or has imbibed the beat of the
hot atmosphere.

‘*Froth*’ is meant to include ‘bubbles’ also, as elsewhere we read that
‘the water should be free from froth and bubbles.’

The terms ‘*through* *the proper receptacle*’ and ‘*one who knows his
duties*’ have been added only for the purpose of filling up the metre.

‘*Desiring cleanliness*’—seeking to attain cleanliness, *i.e*., purity.
The sense is that without the sipping of water he can never be clean.

‘*Always*’—*i.e*., not only at the timo of eating, as would seem implied
by the fact of the rule occurring in the section on ‘eating,’—but also
at other times, when, for instance, one seeks cleanliness after passing
urine or stool, etc.

Though ‘water’ is the object of the act of *sipping*, yet it is put in
the Instrumental Case, with a view to indicate that what is prescribed
is meant to be applicable not only to the water that is sipped but also
to that which forms the instrument in such acts as the washing of the
feet and the like. What we hold is that in the act of *sipping* also the
water is only the ‘instrument’; specially as the *sipping* does not
constitute the sanctification of the water (in which case alone the
water could be the ‘object’).

‘*In solitude*’—*i.e*., in a clean place; a solitary place, being
uncrowded by people, is generally clean.

‘*With his face towards the North or the East*’;—the term ‘face’ is to
be construed along with each of the two terms (‘East’ and ‘North’); as
Gauṭama (1.35) says that ‘the man should face either the North or the
East.’ The compound should be expounded as ‘he who has his face towards
the North, East’; the compound being a pure *Bahuvrīhi*, not a Bahuvrīhi
containing another copulative compound *\[i.e*., we cannot expound the
compound as ‘North *and* East,’ and then compound this with the term
‘*mukha*,’ the sense in this case being ‘one having his face towards the
*North and the East*’\]. If wo made tho Bahuvrīhi contain a copulative
compound, then if the compound ‘*prāṅudak*’ were taken as an aggregative
copulative, it should have an additional ‘*a*’ at the end; nor could it
be taken as a segregative copulative. Further, it is not possible for
the man to face both the North and the East at one and the same time;
for in that case, the rule would mean that one part of the *sipping*
should be done with face towards the North, and another part of it with
face towards the East; and this would mean that the sipping is not done
at one place. Then again, the directions mentioned do not form the
principal factor in the predicate of the sentence, which alone could
justify their being taken reciprocally; nor does the term ‘*prāṅudak*’
from a well-known name of the North-East quarter, in the manner in which
‘*dakṣina-* *pūrva*’ does of the South-East quarter; hence there can be
no justification for the compound being taken as a containing another
compound name of a particular quarter, *\[i.e*., we cannot take
‘*prāṅudak*’ as the name of the North-East quarter and then compound it
with ‘*mukha*’\]. For these reasons the. compound cannot be taken as a
‘*Bahuvrīhi*’ containing within itself another compound. From all this
it follows that *option*, is meant; as is clearly laid down in another
*Smṛti*—‘Acts of cleanliness should be begun with

face towards the North *or* the East’ (*Gauṭama* 1.35). This option is
just like the option that we have in the case of the Sāman to be sung at
the *Ṣaḍoha* sacrifice, where the injunction being in the form that ‘the
*Bṛhadrathantara* Sāman should be sung,’ what is actually done is that
on some days of the sacrifice (which lasts for six days) they sing the
‘*Bṛhat*’ while on other the ‘*Rathantara*’ *Sāman*; and never on any
one day do they ever sing both the *Sāmans*.—(61)

The ‘sipping,’ as consisting of the drinking of water, has been
prescribed; but the exact quantity of the water to be sipped has not yet
been laid down. Hence the Text now proceeds to define the precise
measure (of the water to be sipped):—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 66), where it is
explained that what the epithet ‘*anuṣṇabhiḥ*’ means is that the water
should *not be heated by fire*, as is distinctly stated by Viṣṇu;—again
on page 77, where it is stated to be the injunction of *ācamana* in
general, for all the three castes;—also on page 79, where it is added
that ‘*ekānte*’ means *not crowded*,—where alone the mind can be calm
and collected,—as is laid down by Viṣṇu.

On the tern ‘*prāgudaṅmukhaḥ*,’ this work has the following note,
criticising Medhātithi’s explanation:—“The term *prāgudaṅmukhaḥ* must
mean the *north-east quarter*, on the strength of the declaration of
Hārīta; and in the Śruti also we see the term used in the sense of the
*north-east*—*e. g*. in the passage referring to the branch of the
*Palāśa* tree—

‘*Prāchīmāharati*, *udīchīmāharati*, *prāgudīchīmāharati*’ and also in
*Kātyāyanasūtra*, where it is said—‘*prāgudakpravaṇam devayajanam*,’
where the term ‘*prāgudak*’ stands for the north-east. For these reasons
the assertion of Medhātithi—that ‘the term *prāgudak* being never found
used in the sense of north-east, it should not be explained as
such,’—must be disregarded. Medhātithi has explained the compound
*prāguduṅmukhaḥ* as a Bahuvrīhi compound composed of three terms,
whereby the meaning comes to be that the man must face the East or the
North.”

The writer has conveniently ignored Medhātithi’s reference to Gautama
1.35, in support of his interpretation.

The second half of the verse is quoted in *Śuddhi-kaumudī* (p. 339);—and
in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 983), which notes that ‘*anuṣṇābhiḥ*’ is meant
to prohibit the water heated by fire.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bodhāyanā-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 5. 14.—‘Water-sipping should never be done
with the lingers, nor with such water as has hubbies or foam, is
brackish or saltish, or muddy, or discoloured, or foul-smelling.’

*Baudhāyana* (Vīra-Āhnika, p. 71).—‘Sipping should not be done with
water left over after washing the feet; or if this has to be done, it
should be done after pouring out some of the water on the ground.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 5. 15. 4-7.—‘Water should not bo sipped out of
rain-showers; nor out of cavities in the Earth; nor with warm water,
without reason.’ \[‘Reason’ such as sickness.\] \[Hut according to
Vaśiṣṭha, if the cavity contained water enough for satisfying the cow,
which is not unclean, then, it may be used.\]

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 3. 36.—‘Sipping should not be done with water with bad
colour, bad smell or bad taste, or that proceeding from an unclean
source.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62. 5.—‘Seated in a clean place, with arms between the
knees, facing the East or the North, with happy and concentrated mind,
he should sip water, which is not fire-heated, which is free from foam,
which has not been brought by the Śūdra, and which is not brackish.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.20.—‘With water in its natural condition, free from
bubbles and foam.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.2.22-23.—‘With water, not hot, nor with
bubbles.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīra-Āhnika, p. 66).—‘With water pulled out, which is free
from bubbles and foam, not heated by fire, nor brackish.’

*Gautama and Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 67).—‘Not with water fetched by a
Śūdra or an unclean person or by one hand.’ *Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘With
water which is not brackish and which has not been fetched by a Śūdra or
by an unclean person; nor with water brought with one hand.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘Never with water offered by a Śūdra or an unclean
person, or with one hand.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 68).—‘With water pulled out, purified,
examined, not brackish, nor heated, nor with foam and bubbles.’

*Pracetas* (Do., p. 69).—‘One should twice, thrice or four times sip
water, without making any sound, which is not hot, nor with foam, which
has been purified by cloth and by the eve,—reaching the heart.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 70).—‘Nor with water which has not been looked into,
which is hot or unclean; discoloured or foul-smelling or foamy.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 71).—‘Sipping should not be done with water fetched
by a Śūdra, or with one hand, or by one who has not kept the
observances, or by an unknown person.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 222).—‘It has been declared that at night,
the wise men may be purified by even such water as has not been looked
into; as also for sick men.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

061	He who knows the sacred law and seeks purity shall always perform the rite of sipping with water neither hot nor frothy, with the (prescribed) tirtha, in a lonely place, and turning to the east or to the north.
</details>
