+++
title = "062 हृद्गाभिः पूयते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa is purified by the water reaching the heart; the Kṣatriya by that reaching the throat; the Vaiśya by water that is just sipped, and the Śūdra by what is touched with the end.—(62)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

हृदयं गच्छन्ति प्राप्नुवन्ति **हृद्गाः** । "अन्येष्व् अपि दृश्यते" (पाण् ३.२.१०१) इति गभेर् डः । "हृदयस्य हृद्" (पाण् ६.३.५०) इति योगविभागाद् धृदादेशः । **पूयते** पवित्रतां प्राप्नोत्य् अशुचित्वं व्यावर्तते । आप[^२१९] ईषदूनचुलुकमात्रप्रमाणः, **कण्ठगाभिस्** ताभिः कण्ठमात्रव्यापिनीभिः **भूमिपः** क्षत्रियः । भूमेर् आधिपत्यं क्षत्रियस्य विहितम् । तेन प्रसिद्धेन कर्मणा क्षत्रियजातिर् लक्ष्यते । आधिपत्यविवक्षायां राजधर्मेष्व् एवावक्ष्यत् । **वैश्यः** **प्राशिताभिर्** अन्तरास्यप्रवेशिताभिः । कण्ठम् अप्राप्ता अपि शुद्धिहेतवो वैश्यस्य । **शूद्रः स्पृष्टाभिर् अन्तत** अन्तेनेति । आद्यादित्वात् तृतीयार्थे तसिः । अन्तशब्दो ऽयं समीपवचनो ऽस्ति । उदकान्तं गत उदकसमीपम् इति गम्यते । अस्त्य् अवयववचनः । वस्त्रान्तो वसनान्त इत्य् उभयत्रापि वर्तमानः संबन्ध्यन्तरम् अपेक्ष्यते, कस्य[^२२०] समीपं कस्य वावयव इति । तत्रेह येन स्थानेन वर्णान्तराणाम् आचमनं विहितम्, तीर्थैर् जिह्वोष्ठेन च तदन्तेनेति प्रतीयते । समीपवचनस् तु न संभाव्यः विधीयमानस्याचमनस्य तत्साध्यत्वासंभवात् । स्पर्शे ऽपि प्राशनम् अस्ति । जिह्वौष्ठेन हि स्पृश्यमानस्य रसास्वादनम् अवश्यंभावि । तत्र वैश्यपरिमाणात् किंचिन्न्यूनतात्र विवक्षिता । जिह्वामूलं यावद् वैश्यस्य, जिह्वाग्रं शूद्रस्य । द्रवत्वाद् उदकस्यापरिहार्यो ऽवध्यतिक्रमः, अवश्यप्राप्तौ त्व् अशुद्धिः । सर्वश् चायं तीर्थविभागो दक्षिणहस्तस्योपस्पर्शने हस्तस्यौचित्याद् दक्षिणाचारतायाश् च पुरुषधर्मतया विहितत्वात् । एवमर्थम् एव चास्मिन्न् अवधाव् इदम् उच्यते ॥ २.६२ ॥


[^२२०]:
     M G 1st ed.: asya


[^२१९]:
     M G: sparśa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Reaching the heart*’—that which reaches down to the regions of the
heart; the word being derived from the root ‘*gam*’ with the ‘ḍa’ affix,
according to Pāṇini, 6. 2.101; the term ‘*hṛdaya*’ being changed into
‘*hṛd*’ according to Pāṇini’s Sūtra, 6.3.50.

‘*Is purified*’—Reaches sanctity; that is, gets rid of impurity. The
water (reaching the heart) would, in quantity, be just a little less
than a handful.

‘*The Kṣatriya by that reaching the throat*’—*i.e*., by that which
reaches only down to the throat. The term ‘*bhūmipaḥ*’ in the text
stands for the Kṣatriya; as the ‘lordship of land’ is laid down for the
Kṣatriya only; and hence this well-known function (of ruling the land)
indicates here the *Kṣatriya* caste. If actual ‘lordship’ of the land
were meant, then what is laid down here would have been prescribed among
the ‘duties of tho king.’

‘*The Vaiśya by the water that is just sipped*,’—*i.e*., which is just
taken into the mouth; even without reaching the throat, the water thus
sipped serves to purify the Vaiśya.

‘*The Śūdra by what is touched with the end*;’—‘*anṭataḥ*’ stands for
‘*antena*’; the ‘*tasil*’ affix having the force of the instrumental,
according to the *Vārtika* on Pāṇini, 5. 4. 44. The term ‘*end*’
(*anta*) means proximity; *e.g*., the phrase ‘*udakānta*’ means ‘*near*
water’. It also means *a part*; *e.g*., in such expressions as
‘*vastrānta*,’ ‘*vasanānta*’ and the like. With both these
significations the term ‘end’ (being a relative term) stands in need of
a correlative; whenever it is used, one always wants to know—‘*near*
*what* ’ or ‘*part of what*.’ Now in the present case, the water-sipping
has been laid down for the other castes as to he done with certain parts
of the hand and the lips and the tongue; and it is the ‘end’ of these
that is meant. It cannot mean mere ‘*proxi* *mity*’; because the
‘*water-sipping*’ prescribed cannot he accomplished by mere proximity.
Then again, the ‘touch’ (of the water with the tongue and lips) would
involve *sipping* (which has been laid down for the Vaiśya); for one is
sure to feel the taste of that which is touched with the tongue and
lips. Hence the conclusion appears to he that the quantity of water
sufficient for the *Śūdra* is just a little less in quantity than that
for the *Vaiśya*; *e.g*., while for the Vaiśya the water should touch
the root of the tongue, for the Śūdra it should touch only its tip.

Water being a fluid substance, its going beyond the limits prescribed
would be unavoidable; hence all that is meant is that if the water
sipped fails to reach the prescribed limits, it fails to purify the man.

The description of the ‘receptacles’ (parts of the hand) refers to the
right hand; as it is this hand that should be used in all washings;
specially as it has been laid down that men should perform (religious)
acts with the right hand. It is for this reason that we reiterate this
fact in the present connection.—(62)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 221);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 335), which points out that for the Śūdra, there is no
*ācamana*, as the verse stops short at the Vaiśya; so in the place of
*ācamana*, the Śūdra should wash his hands and feet;—this is clear from
a text of the Brahmapurāṇa;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 74),
where it is explained that ‘*antataḥ*’ means *inside of the mouth*; and
hence what is meant is that there should be no *drinking* of the water,
which should only touch the inner part of the mouth;—such being the
opinion of *Kalpataru*. It is curious that *Kalpataru*, as quoted in
*Vīramitrodaya*, has quoted Manu 5.13 9, where ‘*antataḥ*’ does not
occur at all, and missed the present verse, which, as *Vīramitrodaya*
rightly remarks, is the text that really supports the explanation
provided by *Kalpataru. Vīramitrodaya* notes Medhātithi’s explanation
with approval on p. 75.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 46);—in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 985), which adds the following notes:—‘*Hṛdgābhiḥ*,’
reaching the regions of the heart,—‘*Pūyate*’ acquires
purity;—‘*Kaṇthayābhiḥ*,’ just touching the throat only,—‘*bhūmipoḥ*,’
the Kṣatriya;—‘*prāśitāḥhiḥ*’, just taken into the mouth, and not
reaching the throat,—‘*antataḥ*,’ the affix ‘*tasi*’ has the force of
the Instrumental,—the term ‘*anta*’ meaning *near* requires a
correlative, that to which *nearness* is meant,—so that the meaning is
that the Śūdra is purified by water reaching that point which is in
close proximity to that which the water should reach for purifying the
Vaiśya;—and as the *tongue* is the point for the Vaiśya, for the Śūdra
it must be the *teeth*; though the water that reaches the teeth must
touch the tongue also, yet all that is meant is that the quantity for
the Śūdra should be just a little less than that for the Vaiśya.

It is quoted also in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 221).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 5. 17.—‘The Brāhmaṇa becomes pure by water
reaching the heart, the Kṣatriya by its reaching the throat and the
Vaiśya by water actually drunk off; the woman and the Śūdra by merely
touching it.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62. 9.—‘The three twice-born castes become pure by water
reaching the heart, the throat and the palate respectively, the woman
and the Śūdra by touching it once.’

*Gautama Dharmasūtra*, 1.37.—‘He should thrice or four times sip water
reaching the heart.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 3.33-34.—‘The Brāhmaṇa is purified by bubble-free and
foamless water reaching his heart; the Kṣatriya by it reaching the
throat, the Vaiśya by water actually drunk; the woman and the Śūdra by
merely touching it.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.21.—\[The same words as Viṣṇu, above.\]

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.2.29.—‘He should sip water reaching the heart.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 74).—‘The woman and the Śūdra
are purified by the washing of the hands and lips.’

*Uśanas* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 75).—‘That quantity of water is to be
taken as *reaching the heart* in which a bean sinks; this quantity, less
by its fourth part is taken as *reaching the throat*’, less by half, as
*reaching the palate*; and less by three-fourths, as *reaching the
teeth*.’

*Pracetas*—(See above.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

062	A Brahmana is purified by water that reaches his heart, a Kshatriya by water reaching his throat, a Vaisya by water taken into his mouth, (and) a Sudra by water touched with the extremity (of his lips).
</details>
