+++
title = "063 उद्धृते दक्षिणे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the right hand is held above (the sacred thread etc.), the twice-born person is described as ‘Upavītin’; when the left hand is held above, ‘Prāchīnāvītin,’ and on its hanging by the neck, ‘Nivītin.’—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>ननु</u> च लोकतः सिद्धाः पदार्था धर्मशास्त्रे ऽप्य् आश्रीयन्ते । न पदार्थसंविज्ञानार्थानि मन्वादिवाक्यानि, व्याकरणाभिधानकाण्डस्मृतिवत् । <u>उक्तम्</u> अस्माभिर् यो नातिप्रसिद्धो ऽर्थस् तं चेल् लक्षयन्ति किम् उपालम्भम् अर्हन्ति । अस्ति चात्र किंचित् प्रयोजनम् अन्यद् अपि । आचमनक्रमम् उच्यमानम् उपसंव्यानादिकम् आचमनाङ्गं यथा विज्ञायते । यद्य् अप्य् उपवीतधारणं व्रतार्थतया पुरुषार्थतया वा सर्वदा प्राप्तं तथापि तेन विनाचमनं कृतम् अप्य्[^२२१] अपरिपूर्णम्[^२२२] एव स्यात्[^२२३] । असत्य् अस्मिन् वचने व्रते वैगुण्यं पुरुषदोषश् च स्यात् । अथ पुनर् अन्तरेणोपवीतम् आचमनं कृतम् अप्य् अकृतसमम्, दोषश् च स्याद् अप्य् अशुचिना कृतम् अपां भक्षणम् इति । 


[^२२३]:
     G 1st ed.: eva (na) syāt; G 2nd ed.: eva na syāt 


[^२२२]:
     M G: paripūrṇam


[^२२१]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: kṛtam apy

- <u>कथं</u> पुनः केवलस्योपवीतस्यैवाचमनाङ्गता यावतान्यद् अप्य् अत्र निर्दिष्टं प्राचीनावीति च । <u>उच्यते</u> । प्राचीनावीतं स्वशब्देनैव पित्र्ये कर्मणि विहितम्, तत्रार्थवत्तायाम् उपयातायां नाकृतार्थेनोपवीतेन विकल्पितुम् अर्हति । निवीतम् अप्य् अभिचारे ऽर्थवत् । यद्य् अप्य् अत्र निवीतस्य विनियोगो नास्ति, तथापि स्मृतीनां चैकार्थ्याद् अन्यत्र यो विनियोगस् तेनेहाप्य् अर्थवत्ता भवत्य् एव । पाणिग्रहणं बाहूपलक्षणार्थम् उद्धृतबाहुर् यतो लोक उपवीतीत्य् उच्यते । सार्वकालिकं चोपवीतं वक्ष्यामः । न च केवलपाणाव् उद्धृत उपवीती । **सव्ये** उद्धृते **प्राचीनावीती** । समासपदान् नामधेयम् । असमासस् तु वृत्तानुरोधितया । **कण्ठसज्जने** । कण्ठे सज्जनं सङ्गः[^२२४] स्थापनम् । यदा वस्त्रस्य सूत्रस्य वान्यतरो ऽपि बाहुर् उद्ध्रियते तदा **निवीती** भवति ॥ २.६३ ॥


[^२२४]:
     G 1st ed.: saṅga
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

An *objection* is raised—“As a matter of fact, in treatises dealing with
*Dharma*, the meanings of words are accepted to be exactly as they are
known in ordinary usage; and the works of Manu and others should not
make it their business to explain the meanings of words, in the way in
which it is done by grammatical and lexicographical works.”

*Ānswer*.—We have already answered this before; if treatises on Dharma
should be found to supply the explanation of such words as are not
ordinarily known, are they to be blamed for doing so? Then again, in the
present instance, there is another purpose also in view. The term
‘*upavītin*’ is explained in the course of the explanation of the act of
‘water-sipping,’ with a view to indicate that the method (of wearing the
sacred thread, etc.) is auxiliary to that act. Though it is true that
the wearing of the sacred thread,—either as part of a religious
observance, or as accomplishing certain desirable results for man,—is
known as to be done at all times, yet if the ‘water-sipping’ were done
without it, it would remain incomplete. So that, if we did not have the
present text (as indicating the necessity of wearing the sacred thread
during water-sipping), there would be some deficiency in the religious
act, as also some defect in the agent. If the sipping were done without
the sacred thread, it would be as good as not done, and there would be
the additional wrong done, in the shape of sipping the water while
unclean.

*Question*.—“How is it that the *Upavīta-method* alone is regarded as
auxiliary to the ‘water-sipping,’ when as a matter of fact, the present
text has spoken of another method, the ‘*Prāchīnāvīta*,’ also?”

Our answer is as follows:—As for the ‘*Prāchīnāvīta*’ method, this has
been directly prescribed, in so many words, as pertaining to acts of
offering to the *Pitṛs*; so that when its use has been found in
connection with these, it could not be taken as an alternative to the
‘*Upavīta*’ method, whose use has not yet been found. Similarly the
‘*Nivīṭa*’ method also has its use in connection with acts of sorcery.
Though the use of the ‘*Nivīṭa*’ has not been laid down in the itself,
yet since all *Smṛtis* have the same end in view, the use prescribed in
other *Smṛtis* could be regarded as accepted in the present context
also.

The term ‘*hand*’ stands here for the *arm*; it is only when the man
raises his *arm* that he is called ‘*Upavīṭi*’; further, we are going to
point out later on that the ‘*Upavīṭa*’ is the method (of wearing the
thread) to be employed at all times (not during religious acts only);
and no one is called ‘*Upavīṭin*’ by merely lifting his *hand*.

‘*When the left hand is held above*,’ he is called ‘*Prāchīnāvīṭī*’; it
is the compounded form (‘*prāchīnāvīṭī*’) that constitutes the name; the
text puts it iu the uncompounded form on account of the exigencies of
metre.

‘*On its hanging by the neck*’;—‘*Sajjana*,’ ‘*hanging*’ means *being
worn*, when the sacred thread, or the piece of cloth, is worn over the
neck, and neither arm is held over it, then the man becomes
‘*nivītī*.’—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 39), which notes that the
non-compounding (in ‘*prāchīna-āvīti*’ is a Vedic anomaly;—and in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 188).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 5.1.5-8.—‘The Sacred Thread worn at sacrifices
to gods (*upavīta*) consists of the silk or the cotton thread folded
three times three: it should reach down to the navel; the right arm
being held above;—the reverse (*prāchīnāvita*) at offerings to Pitṛs;
hanging by the neck, it is *nivīta*; hanging downwards it is
*adhovīta*.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.6.18-19.—‘He who is wearing the Sacred Thread
in the *upavīta* form is to be regarded as wearing two pieces of
cloth;—while he who is wearing it in the *Adhovīta* form, is to be
regarded as wearing only one piece of cloth.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.2.2-3.—‘Holding aloft the right arm, passing
over the head, resting the thread on the left shoulder, hanging down the
right arm-pit,—thus does he become the *wearer* *of* *the Yajñopavīta*;
lifting the left arm, passing over the head, resting the thread on the
right shoulder, hanging down the left arm-pit,—thus does he become the
*wearer of* *the* *Prāchīnāvīta*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

063	A twice-born man is called upavitin when his right arm is raised (and the sacrificial string or the dress, passed under it, rests on the left shoulder); (when his) left (arm) is raised (and the string, or the dress, passed under it, rests on the right shoulder, he is called) prakinavitin; and nivitin when it hangs down (straight) from the neck.
</details>
