+++
title = "064 मेखलाम् अजिनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the girdle, the skin, the staff, the sacred thread or the water-pot becomes damaged, he should throw it into the water and take up another with the proper formulas.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विनष्टानाम् अप्सु प्रासनम् अन्येषां च ग्रहणम् अत्र विधीयते । प्रासनग्रहणयोः पौर्वापर्यं यथाश्रुतम् एव । अस्माच् च पुनर् उपादानान् नैषाम् उपनयनाङ्गतैव । तदङ्गत्वे हि तत्प्रयोगापवर्गितैव स्यात् । किं तर्हि, यावद् ब्रह्मचर्यं धारणम् ।

- <u>अथ किम्</u> उपनयनकाल एव प्राक् कर्मनिष्पत्तेः दैवान् मानुषाद् वा प्रतिबलाद् विनष्टानां प्रतिपत्तिर् न संभवति । प्रयोगसमाप्त्यर्थं च पुनरुपादानम्, यथा कपालस्य, येनैवम् उच्यत अस्मात् पुनरुपादानाद् धारणम् अनुमीयते ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । ग्रहणं तावद् दण्डस्य चोदितम्, मेखलाया बन्धनम् । तत्र सूत्रस्य[^२२५] विन्यासस् तावद् उपनयनाङ्गत्वेनावश्यं कर्तव्यम् । कृते तस्मिन् कृतः शास्त्रार्थः । उत्तरकालं किं तैर् नष्टैर् अनष्टैर् वा । अङ्गनाशे च प्रतिपत्तिविशेषः कर्मोपकारको भवति । न च तेषां किंचन कार्यम् आम्नातं येन तत्सिद्ध्यर्थं विशिष्टे काले वाचनिकम् उपादानम् । अकृतत्वाच् च कार्यस्य तत्प्रयुक्तं पुनरुपादानम् अर्थसिद्धम् उच्यते । तस्मात् प्रतिपत्तिविधानाद् उपादानवचनाच् च धारणम् अङ्गम्, न च प्रयोगापवर्गि । यतः कमण्डलुनोपनयनोत्तरकालानुवर्तिना तुल्यवन् निर्देशात् तेषाम् अप्य् उत्तरत्रानुवृत्तिः प्रतीयते । सा च व्रताङ्गम् । अत उभयार्था मेखलादयः- प्रकरणाद् उपनयनार्थाः, निवृत्ते चोपनयने दर्शनाद् यावद् ब्रह्मचर्यभाविनः । कमण्डलुश्[^२२६] चोदकार्थः कर्तव्यो ऽस्माद् एव प्रतिपत्तिविधानात् । अन्यथा यदा कमण्डलुस् तदेयं प्रतिपत्तिर् इति पाक्षिकत्वं स्यात् । 


[^२२६]:
     M G 1st ed.: kamaṇḍalunā


[^२२५]:
     G: sūtrakasya

- तत्र दण्डधारणं प्रतिगृह्य दण्डं भिक्षां चरेद् इति क्रमाद् भैक्ष्यचर्याङ्गत्वम् एव प्राप्तं समाचाराद् अभैक्षे ऽर्थे ऽपि भ्रमणे भवत्य् एव । न तु सर्वदैव करतलधृतदण्डस्य स्थानासनशयनभोजनादीनि । तथा च स्वाध्याये ब्रह्माञ्जलिं वक्ष्यति । 

- **मन्त्रवद्** इत्य् उपनयनविधिना ग्रहणम् अनुवदति । तत्र च मेखलाया मन्त्रः, न दण्डस्य ॥ २.६४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present verse enjoins that when these things are damaged, they
should be thrown into water and others should be taken up; and the
sequence of the ‘throwing’ and the ‘taking up’ is to be just as it is
found in the text. In as much as one has got to take up these things
again, they cannot be regarded as forming part of the Initiatory
Ceremony itself; if it were part of this ceremony, then all their
purpose would have been fulfilled by the completion of the ceremony. The
right view therefore is that these should continue to be taken up
throughout the ‘student-stage.’

“But is it not possible to regard the *throwing into water* here laid
down as the *disposal* of the things mentioned, if they happen, during
the Initiatory Ceremony—and before its completion,—to be damaged by
divine or human adverse forces? The taking up of fresh ones, would, in
this case, be necessary for the completion of the ceremony; just as
there is of the begging-bowl. Is it absolutely impossible for the text
to be taken in this manner, that the mere fact of the *re-taking* being
laid down should be made the basis of assuming that the things should
continue to be held throughout the student-stage?”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—As for mere ‘*holding*,’ this has
been laid down in connection with the *staff* only (during the
Initiatory Rite); as for the *girdle* what is to be done during the
ceremony is only its *tying* (round the waist); so that what should be
done as part of the Initiatory Ceremony is the peculiar *arrangement of
strings* (which constitutes the act of *tying*); this being done, the
purpose of the Injunction will have been fulfilled; so that if, at some
future time, any thing becomes damaged or not, what effect could that
have upon the ceremony (which will have been long completed)? As for the
particular form of ‘disposal,’ this helps the Rite only when what has
become damaged forms an integral part of the Rite itself. Nor again have
the scriptures laid down any purpose for which the girdle, etc., are
worn, for the fulfilment of which purpose, the re-taking of them (during
the ceremony) would be enjoined (in the present text); it is only when
the purpose of a certain object has not been fulfilled, that we take it
for granted that that object should be taken up again. For these
reasons, because the text lays down (*a*) a particular form of
*Disposal*, and (*b*) the re-taking of the things, we conclude that,
even though the holding of these may form an integral part of the
Initiatory Ceremony, the necessity of this *holding* does not end with
the completion of the ceremony. Then again, the girdle, etc., are
mentioned in the same category as the ‘water-pot,’ which continues to be
held *after* the ceremony also; and this shows that the other articles
also are to continue to be held, and all this ‘holding’ forms part of
the *observances* (of the Religious Student). From all this it follows
that the girdle and other things are subservient to both: by the force
of ‘context,’ they form part of the Initiatory Ceremony, and since they
are found to be held after the completion of that ceremony, they are to
continue as long as the ‘student-stage’ lasts. That the ‘water-pot’ has
to be carried (always) for the purpose of carrying water is also implied
by (the binding and universal character of) the injunction of the
‘Disposal’; otherwise (if the *pot* were not meant to be carried
*always*), the meaning of the injunction would be that the *disposal* is
to be carried out only when the water-pot may be held; and this would
make the Injunction partial and limited in its application.

As regards the ‘holding of the staff,’ this comes to be regarded as part
of the ‘begging of food,’ on the basis of sequence enjoined in the rule
‘one should beg for food *after taking up the staff*’, but on the basis
of actual practice, it comes to be done in connection with such ordinary
*talking* also as is not done for the purpose of ‘food-begging.’ But it
does not mean that the staff should be held *always*; for the boy who
may be holding the stick would be unable to do such acts as standing,
sitting, sleeping, eating and so forth; similarly in Verse 2.70 it is
laid down that the boy, when proceeding to read the Veda, should sit
with joined palms (and this would not be possible if he held the staff
in his hand).

‘*With the proper formulas*’—this means that the retaking of the
articles should be in the same manner in which they are taken up during
the Initiatory Ceremony; and in that connection formulas are laid down
in regard to the wearing of the Girdle, and not in regard to the holding
of the staff.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 451), which says
that it lays down the method of disposing of the sacred thread and other
things whenever they happen to break;—also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 190).

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 934) which says that, as the use of
mantras is essential, if a certain Gṛhyasūtra does not mention the
mantra, it has to be borrowed from another Gṛhyasūtra;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 423), where also the verse is explained as
laying down the ‘disposal’ of the tilings mentioned. The latter quotes
the verse again on p. 887, where it is explained that in a case where an
injunction lays down a certain act as to be done ‘with the proper
mantras’—as is done in the present verse—and no particular *mantra* is
prescribed? one has to use the *mantra* that may be found mentioned in a
particular *Gṛhyasūtra*. This is what ‘*mantravat*’ has beeif explained
to mean, in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 37 also.)

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,, p. 85) as laying down the
disposal of the sacred thread that has been worn out;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 39), which notes that the meaning of the term
‘*mantravat*’ is that they have to be worn with those same mantras that
were used for wearing them at the *Upanayana*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Paribhāṣā, p. 72) as an example of the principle that where the text
laying down a certain act as to be done ‘with mantras’ does not specify
the particular mantras to be used, these have to be taken as laid down
in other *Gṛhyasūtras*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.29.—\[Reproduces the exact words of Manu.\]

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 4.5-7.—‘When these articles become spoilt by
urine, excreta, blood or semen, they should be thrown away; when the
water-pot breaks, one should offer a hundred libations with the Vyāhrti
mantras; the pieces he should throw into the water, and repeating the
Sāvitrī ten times, he should take up another pot.’

*Bhṛgu* (Vīra-Samskāra, p. 423).—‘When the sacred thread is torn or
broken, the Brāhmaṇa should bathe and then wear a new one.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

064	His girdle, the skin (which serves as his upper garment), his staff, his sacrificial thread, (and) his water-pot he must throw into water, when they have been damaged, and take others, reciting sacred formulas.
</details>
