+++
title = "066 अमन्त्रिका तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For females, this whole series should be performed at the right time and in the proper order, for the purpose of sanctifying the body; but without the Vedic formulas—(66)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**इयम् आवृद् अशेषतः स्त्रीणाम् अमन्त्रिका कार्या** । जातकर्मण आरभ्य **इयं** संस्काराणाम् **आवृत्** परिपाठी । सेतिकर्तव्यताकः संस्कारकलाप इति यावत् । **संस्कारार्थं** शुद्ध्यर्थं **शरीरस्य** पुंसाम् इव[^२२७] स्त्रीणाम् अपि प्रयोजनम् आह । **यथाकालम्** । यस्मिन् काले यः संस्कार उक्तस् तं कालम् अनतिक्रम्य । पदार्थानतिवृत्तौ "यथासादृश्ये" (पाण् २.१.७) अव्ययीभावः । एवं क्रमे ऽपि द्रष्टव्यम् । मन्त्रमात्ररहिताया आवृतो विहितत्वाद् अयथाकालक्रमप्राप्तिर् एव नास्तीत्य् अतो[^२२८] निषेधो नित्यानुवादो वृत्तपूरणार्थः । एतावद् विवक्षितं स्त्रीणां चैते अमन्त्रका इति ॥ २.६६ ॥


[^२२८]:
     J: nāsti | atyato


[^२२७]:
     M G 1st ed.: pauṃsnam eva

_पूर्वेणावृद्वचनेन जातकर्मादिवद् उपनयने ऽप्य् अमन्त्रके प्राप्ते_[^२२९]_ तन्निवृत्त्यर्त्यम् आरभ्यते ।_


[^२२९]:
     M G 1st ed. add: tadāpattivacanaṃ vivāhasya; this is included in the third sentence of the commentary.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*This whole series*’ should be done for females, without the recitation
of Vedic formulas.—‘*Series*’ stands for the entire body of sacraments,
beginning with the ‘Birth-rites,’ along with all the acts that
constitute their procedure.

‘*For the purpose of sanctifying*’—*i.e*., purifying This means that the
purpose of the sacraments in the case of females that is the same as
that in that of males.

‘*At the proper time*,’—*i.e*., without letting that time pass which has
been prescribed for the several sacraments. The term ‘*yathā*’ here
signifies *non-transgression*, and hence, not signifying ‘similarity,’
it is compounded according to Pāṇini 2.1.7.

The same explanation applies to the compound ‘*yathā-kramam*’ also.

In as much as the text has distinctly asserted that it is only the
reciting of Vedic formulas that may be omitted, there could be no idea
of the sacraments (for females) being performed at a time, or in an
order, other than the prescribed ones; so that the prohibition of other
times and another order should be taken as merely describing what is
already known, and as added only for the purpose of filling up the
metre. All that is really meant by the text is that for females the
sacraments should be performed without the Vedic formulas.

The ‘series’ spoken of above would imply that like the ‘Birth-rite’ and
the other ceremonies, the ‘Initiatory ceremony’ also should be performed
for females; with a view to preclude this idea, the Text adds—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 926);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
362), where *āvṛt* is explained as *jātakarmādikriyā*; and *yathākramam*
is to taken to mean that there should ho no deviation from the exact
order of sequence—such deviation necessitating expiation;—in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 188);—and in *Aparārka* (p. 30), which explains
*āvṛt* as ‘*kriyā*’, act, rite;—‘*aśeṣtaḥ*’ as along with all details’,
and ‘*yathākramam*’ as meaning that the order of the sacraments should
not be disturbed or else the *Sarvaprāyaścitta* has to be performed.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, at several places, on pages
194, 255, 278, 317 and 403). On p. 194, ‘āvṛt’ is explained as
*jātakarmādikriyā*; and on the term ‘*amantrikā*’ it is added that what
this interdicts is the use of only those *mantras* that pertain to the
*primary* acts of eating butter, honey and the rest, and not the use of
the *subsidiary* mantras; and this conclusion is in accordance with the
principle enunciated in *Mīmāṃsā Sutra* 3.8. 34-35, where it is declared
that the qualification of *upāṃśutva* (silence) pertains to only the
primary rite of the ‘*Ātharvaṇa Iṣṭis*’ and not to the subsidiary
ones.—On p. 255 the verse is quoted in support of the view that the rite
of *Niṣkramaṇa*, is to be performed in the case of the female baby
also.—Similarly on p. 278, it is quoted to show that the rite of
‘*Annprāśana*’ should be performed for the female baby.—On p. 317, it is
made to justify performance of the rite of ‘Tonsure’ for girls.—On page
403, it is quoted as laying down the performance of all the
sacraments—beginning from the *Jātakarma* and ending with the *Keśānta*;
whereby it is concluded that the *Upanayaṇa* also, for girls is to be
done ‘without mantras’; another view is noted, whereby the pronoun ‘this
‘*iyam* in Manu’s text is taken as standing only for the first five
sacraments, ending with Tonsure, so that *Upanayaṇa* and *Keśānta*
become excluded from the category. But this view is rejected; and in
answer to the argument that “in view of the declaration in the following
verse that for women *Marriage* constitutes *Upanayaṇa*, the pronoun
‘*iyam*’ in the present verse must exclude *Upanayaṇa*—it is pointed out
that all that the next verse means is that in the case of a person
following the opinion of another Smṛti and not performing the
*Upanayana* for his girl,—Marriage should be regarded as constituting
her *Upanayana*; and not that in all cases Marriage should take the
place of *Upanayana*. The conclusion is stated thus:—There are two kinds
of girls—‘*Brahmavādinī*’ and ‘*Sodyovodhū*’;—for the former there is
Upanayana, in the eighth year, vedic study, and ‘return’ (completion of
Vedic study) before puberty,—and marriage also before puberty; while for
the *Sodyovodhū*, there is *Upanayana* at the time of marriage, followed
by immediate ‘completion of study,’ which is followed immediately by
Marriage. But from the assertion in certain Smṛtis that there used to be
Upanayana for women in a ‘previous cycle,’ it seems that in the present
cycle, it is not to be performed. (Bee note on the next verse).

The above note regarding the two kinds of women is based on a passage in
Hārīta Smṛti (quoted in *Madanapārijātā*, p. 37), which adds that all
this refers to another cycle. The exact words of Hārīta mean as
follows:—“There are two kinds of women—Brahmavādinī and Sadyovadhū; for
the former, there are Upanayana, fire-laying, vedic study in the house
itself and also alms-begging; while for the latter, when the time of
marriage arrives, Upanayana should be performed somehow and then
marriage.”

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 400);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 00) which explains ‘*āvṛt*’ as meaning the
Jātakarma and other rites, and adds that this implies that none of the
rites is to be omitted for the women.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.13.—‘The same rites for women are done without
mantras.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.13.—‘These rites for women are to be performed
silently, but Marriage is to be with manteras.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 15 (16.7)—1.2.—‘For the girl, the Āvṛta only’
\[‘āvṛta’ standing for the Jātakarma and other rites\],

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Samskāra, p. 191).—‘For women, these
rites are to be performed silently, but the Homa is to be done with
mantras.’

*Śaunaka* (Do., p. 278).—‘All this rite is to be performed for the girl,
without mantras.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Do., p. 278).—‘The rites beginning with the
Jātakarma and ending with Tonsure are to be done for women, without
mantras; but even in Tonsure, the Homa is to be done with mantras.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

066	This whole series (of ceremonies) must be performed for females (also), in order to sanctify the body, at the proper time and in the proper order, but without (the recitation of) sacred texts.
</details>
