+++
title = "067 वैवाहिको विधिः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For females the Rites of marriage have been ordained to be their ‘Vedic Sacrament,’ the serving of the husbands their ‘residence with the Teacher,’ and the household-duties their ‘tending of fire.’—(67)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वैवाहिको विधिः स्त्रीणां  
संस्कारो वैदिकः स्मृतः ।  
पतिसेवा गुरौ वासो  
गृहार्थो ऽग्नि-परिक्रिया  ॥ २.६७ ॥+++(5)+++
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ceremony called ‘*Upanaya*,’ ‘Initiation,’ has been called ‘Vedic,’
because it is gone through for the purpose of studying the Veda. This
ceremony, in the case of females, consists of the ‘Rites of
marriage,’—*i.e*., those rites that are accomplished by means of
marriage. Thus, since ‘marriage’ has been prescribed for them in place
of the ‘Initiation,’ the former has been described here as becoming the
latter; and this can preclude the necessity of ‘Initiation’ only if the
purposes of this latter were taken as served by the ‘marriage.’

*Objection*.—“Well, the Initiation may be excluded from women, but the
study of the Veda and the keeping of the observances have still got to
be performed.”

With a view to preclude these two also, the Text adds—

‘*The serving of husband is their residence with the Teacher*.’ When the
woman *serves*—attends upon and reveres her husband, she does what is
meant to bo accomplished by ‘Residence with the Teacher.’ The study of
the Veda could be done by the woman only if she resided with the
Teacher; and as there is no ‘Residence with the Teacher’ in her case,
how can there be any studying of the Veda? ‘*Household duties*’;—all
that she does in the course of her household work,—*e.g*., cooking,
getting together of articles for household use, general supervision, and
so forth, which are going to be described in discourse IX, ‘the husband
should employ her in saving wealth &c., &c.’ (9.11). These household
duties are for the woman what the ‘bringing of fuel’ in the morning and
evening is for the Religious Student (male). The term ‘*tending of*
*fire*’ stands for all the observances and vows that the student keeps.

By reason of the ‘Marriage’ having taken the place of the ‘Initiatory
Ceremony’ (for women), it follows that, just as in the case of men, all
the ordinances of Śruti and Smṛti and custom become binding upon him
after the Initiatory Ceremony, before which they are free to do what
they like, and are unfit for any religious duties,—so for women, there
is freedom of action before Marriage, after which they become subject to
the ordinances of Śrutis and Smṛtis.

Or, we may interpret the text as follows:—Marriage constitutes the Vedic
Sacrament—*i.e*., TJpanayana—for females; even though marriage is not
really the Upanayana, yet it is spoken of as such attributively. The
question arising as to whence lies the similarity by virtue of which
Marriage is spoken of as Upanayana, the text adds—‘*the serving of the
husband* &c., &c.’—(67)

The next verse sums up the contents of the section—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vaivāhikovidhiḥ*’—‘Sacrament performed with Vedic texts’ (Nandana and
Rāghavānanda);—‘Sacrament for the purpose of learning the Veda’
(Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse has been quotçd in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 220) to
the effect that for women *Marriage* itself is *Upanayana*;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 61), which notes that for women,
‘attending’ on husband takes the place of ‘service of the teacher,’ and
‘household duties’ take the place of ‘tending the fire,’ and that for
girls also, before marriage, there are no restrictions regarding food
and other tilings;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, pp. 403-4), where
it is discussed along with the preceding verse (see note on 66). This
verse has been taken as excluding women from *Upanayana*, entirely. But
the author points out that this is not right; and he sets forth his
well-considered opinion at the end (see note on 66); and the present
verse he takes only as laying down a substitute for the Upanayana in the
case of those women who are not *Brahmavādinīs*.

*Vīramitrodaya* proceeds to explain the verse to mean that ‘*vaidikaḥ
saṃskāraḥ*’—‘the sacrament which is gone through for the purpose of
studying the Veda,’—*i. e*., Upanayana—consists, in the case of women,
in the ‘rites of marriage’; *i. e*., consecration brought about by the
marriage-rites, as has been “declared’ by the ancients. It points out
that such is the meaning of the verse with the words ‘*Saṃskāro vaidikaḥ
smṛtaḥ*’ as read by Medhātithi; but *Mitākṣarā* and other works adopt
the reading ‘*aupanāyanikaḥ smṛtaḥ*’ instead of ‘*saṃskāro vaidikaḥ
smṛtaḥ*’, which means that marriage rites *serve the purpose of
Upanayana rite*; so that marriage would be for women what *Upanayana* is
for men.

This verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 37), which also adopts
the reading ‘*aupanāyanikaḥ smṛtaḥ*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 22.32.—‘For women Marriage is the sacrament.’

*Vìsmt-Smṛti*, 27-15.—‘The Marriage of women is with mantras.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.13.—‘For women, Marriage is with mantras.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 402).—‘In former times, for girls
also there was Upanayana, also the teaching of the Veda and the
pronouncing of the Sāvitrī. But she should be taught by her father,
uncle or brother, none else. For the girl, alms-begging is to be done in
her own home; and she should avoid the skin, the rags and also matted
locks.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

067	The nuptial ceremony is stated to be the Vedic sacrament for women (and to be equal to the initiation), serving the husband (equivalent to) the residence in (the house of the) teacher, and the household duties (the same) as the (daily) worship of the sacred fire.
</details>
