+++
title = "069 उपनीय गुरुः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having initiated the pupil, the Teacher should, first of all, teach him cleanliness, right behaviour, firetending and also the twilight-devotions.—(69)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शिक्षयेद्** व्युत्पादयेच् **छौचम् आदितः** । **आदित** इति वचनेनाचारादिभ्यः प्राग् उपदेशः शौचस्य नेष्यते[^२३९] । किं तर्हि, अनियतक्रमकाः परस्परम् एते । केवलम् उपनयनानन्तरं व्रतादेशनं वक्ष्यति । आदिष्टवेदव्रतस्य च वेदाध्ययनम् । अतो ऽग्नीन्धनसंध्योपासनयोः समन्त्रकत्वाद् अकृते व्रतादेशे मन्त्रोच्चारणम् अप्राप्तं विधीयते । शौचं चानियतकालम्, तद् अवश्यं[^२४०] तदहर् एवोपदेष्टव्यम् । एवम् आचारो ऽपि । अत इदम् **आदित** इति वचनम् आदरार्थं न प्रथमोपदेश्यतां शौचस्य विधत्ते । शौचम् "एका लिङ्गे" इत्याद्याचमनान्तम् (म्ध् ५.१३६–१४५) । **आचारो** गुर्वादीनां प्रत्युत्थानासनदानाभिवादनादिः[^२४१] । **अग्निकार्यम्** अग्न्याधानकार्यं समित्समिन्धनम् । संध्यायाम् आदित्यस्योपासनं तत्स्वरूपभावनं **संध्याया उपासनम्** । एवं वा "पूर्वां संध्याम्" (य्ध् १.१०१) इत्यादि । एष व्रतधर्मः ॥ २.६९ ॥


[^२४१]:
     M G: -vādanādibhiḥ; J: -vādanādi (mine is a conjectural emendation)


[^२४०]:
     G 1st ed.: tadavaśiṣṭaṃ


[^२३९]:
     M G 1st ed.: śaucasyeṣyate

_अध्ययनधर्मान् इदानीम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Should teach*’—should make him learn.

‘*First of all*’;—this does not mean that Cleanliness should be taught
before Right Behaviour and the rest; in fact, there is no order of
sequence intended among those mentioned here; all that the text is going
to lay down is that after the Initiation there should he the teaching of
the observances; and after the pupil has been instructed regarding the
observances, he should proceed with the study of the Veda. Hence if the
text meant that the boy should be taught Fire-kindling and the
Twilight-Devotions before being taught the observances, it would be
laying down for him the reciting of mantras not prescribed anywhere
else,—because each of the two acts mentioned is performed with mantras.
As for ‘cleanliness,’ there can be no fixed time for it; and it must be
taught on the very day on which the boy has been initiated. So also
‘Right Behaviour.’ For these reasons it is clear that the phrase ‘first
of all’ is meant to denote *importance*, and it does not mean that it is
to be taught before everything else.

‘*Cleanliness*’—stands for all those acts that begin with the washing of
the private parts, once, &c., &c. (5. 136) and ending with the *sipping
of water*.

‘*Right Behaviour*’—rising to receive the Teacher and other superiors,
offering them seat and saluting them.

‘*Fire-tending*’—the kindling of fire, and supplying of fuel.

The *devotion* offered at *twiligh*, to the Sun, consists in meditating
upon the form of the Sun. This is what is meant by the
‘*Twilight-Devotions*.’ Or, it may refer to what is going to be
prescribed below, in verse 101.

This is what constitutes the ‘Duty relating to Observances.’—(69)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 491).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.15.—‘The Teacher, having initiated the pupil, should
teach him the Mahāvyāhṛtis and the Veda, and then instruct him regarding
cleanliness and practices.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 22.1.—‘Having tied the girdle-zone and handed
over the staff, he should instruct him regarding the duties of
studentship, addressing him thus;—“Thou art a religious student, sip
water, do your duty, sleep not during the day, under the guidance of
your teacher study the Veda.”

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.12; 3.5.—‘He is a Teacher, because he expounds
the Veda;—the student should remain under the Teacher.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.1.9, 12, 14.—‘Upanayana is the Vedic
sacrament, for one who is seeking after knowledge; for that purpose one
should seek an initiator who would belong to a noble family and be
endowed with learning and self-control,—and under him one should remain
till the completion of his study;—he is called *Ācarya* because be
*contributes to the accumulation* (ācinoti) of Dharma.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 30).—‘For the student, Vedic study, Fire-feeding,
Bathing, Living on alms, Attending on the Teacher till death, and in his
absence, on his son or on a fellow-student.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

069	Having performed the (rite of) initiation, the teacher must first instruct the (pupil) in (the rules of) personal purification, of conduct, of the fire-worship, and of the twilight devotions.
</details>
