+++
title = "071 ब्रह्मारम्भे ऽवसाने"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At the beginning and at the end op the (study of) the Veda, the feet of the Teacher should always be clasped; and the veda should me studied with joined palms; this is what has been called the ‘Brahmāñjali.’—(71)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ब्रह्म**शब्दो ऽयम् अनेकार्थो ऽप्य् अध्ययनाधिकाराद् अत्र वेदवचनः प्रतीयते । तस्य्**आरम्भे** । निमित्तसप्तम्य् एषा । अध्ययनाधिकाराद् एव च तद्विषयाध्ययनक्रिया, तस्यायम् आरम्भः, प्रथमावृत्तिः पुरुषस्य । तत्रेदं पादग्रहणम् । वेदस्य तु यान्य् आद्यक्षराणि "अग्निम् ईऌए" (र्व् १.१.१), "इषे त्वा" (त्स् १.१.१.१), "अग्न आयाहि" (स्व् १.१) इति, न सो ऽत्रारम्भ उच्यते । न हि तस्य निमित्तभावः संभावितः, नित्यत्वात् । कादाचित्कं हि निमित्तं भवति । तेनैतद् उक्तं भवति- वेदाध्ययनम् आरिप्समानो गुरोः पादसंग्रहणं कुर्यात्, कृत्वा ततः स्वाध्यायाक्षरान्य् उच्चारयेत्, न पुनः प्रवृत्ताध्ययनक्रियः पादौ गृह्णीयात् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाद्यक्रियाक्षण आरम्भः, स च निमित्तम् । विद्यमानस्य च निमित्तत्वं युक्तं जीवनस्येव । अत्र गेहदाहाद्यतीतम् अपि निमित्तं तत्र तथैव श्रवणम् । तस्मात् सहप्रयोग एवाध्ययनपादोपसंग्रहणयोर् युक्तः ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । अध्यापनाध्यवसाय आरम्भ उच्यते, नाद्यः क्रियाक्षणः । यदैव गुरुर् अधीष्येत्य् आह तदैवाध्यवस्यति मानवकः । अतस् तदनन्तरं पादोपग्रहः । उपकारप्रवृत्तस्य गुरोश् चित्तप्रसादनम् एतत् । यथा लोके कश्चिद् उपकारप्रवृत्तं सभाजयति वाचा "ननु त्वया वयम् अस्मात् पापान् मोचिताः" इति । अनक्षरा चेयम् अध्येषणा "उपसन्नो ऽस्म्य् अध्ययनाय[^२४२]" इति । न हि गुरुर् उपरोध्यो ऽध्यापयेति । केवलम् उपसदनम् अस्य कर्तव्यं संबोधार्थम् अवसरो ऽध्ययनस्येति । अतः कृतोपसदनस्य वेदाक्षरोच्चरणम् । अपि च **संहत्य हस्ताव् अधेतव्यम्** इत्य् उच्यते । तत्राधीयानः पादोपसंग्रहणविधिम् अतिक्रमेत । 


[^२४२]:
     M G 1st ed.: upasannāḥ smādhyayanāya

- **अवसानं** समाप्तिर् अध्ययनाद् उपरमः । यद्य् अपि ब्रह्मशब्द आरम्भे गुणभूतस् तथाप्य् अवसानस्य सापेक्षत्वात् संनिहितत्वाद् ब्रह्मपदेनैव संबन्धः प्रतीयते, अन्यस्याश्रुतत्वात् । **सदा**ग्रहणम् अन्वहं भाविप्रयोगारम्भावसानयोर् एष विधिर् यथा स्याद् इतरथा य एव व्रतादेशानन्तरो मुख्यप्रारम्भः तत्रैव स्यात् । अथान्वारम्भणीया दर्शपूर्णमासारम्भे चोदिता य एवाधानानन्तरभावी दर्शपूर्णमासप्रयोगारम्भः तत्रैव भवति, न मासिकप्रयोगारम्भे । [^२४३]प्रातर् आरभ्य यावद् आह्निकं न निवृत्तं प्रपाठकद्वयमात्रपरिमाणम्, तावद् एकैव साध्ययनक्रियेति । अन्तरा कथंचिद् विच्छेदे ऽपि पुनः प्रवृत्तौ नारम्भशब्दवाच्यतास्तीति न पुनः पादोपसदनं क्रियते । स्मृत्यन्तरे च पठ्यते- "पादोपग्रहणं गुरोः प्रातर् अन्वहम्" इति । 


[^२४३]:
     M G add before prātar: na māsikaprayogārambhe prātaḥ

- **संहत्य** संलग्नौ संश्लिष्टौ परस्परं कृत्वा **अध्येयम्** । कच्छप[^२४४] इति यः संनिवेशो हस्तयोः प्रसिद्धस् तथा कर्तव्यः । **स हि ब्रह्माञ्जलिः** । पदार्थकथनम् एतत् ॥ २.७१ ॥


[^२४४]:
     MG: kacchapakarṇa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though the term ‘*brahma*’ has many meanings, yet, in view of the fact
of the present context bearing on ‘study,’ it is taken here as standing
for the *Veda*.

‘*At the beginning of the Veda*’;—the Locative ending denotes
*occasion*; and since the context bears upon ‘study,’ the beginning
meant is that of the action of *study*; and the ‘*beginning*’ stands for
the very *first recitation* by the person concerned. And it is at this
first recitation that the Teacher’s feet are to be clasped. The term
‘beginning’ here cannot stand for the first letters of the
Vedas—‘*agnimīle*’ (Ṛgveda), ‘*ikhe tvorje*’ (Yajurveda), ‘*agna āyāhi*’
(Sāmaveda); because these opening words could never form the *occasion*
(for the clasping of the feet); for the simple reason that (being parts
of the eternal Veda) they are ever present; while it is only what is
itself occasional (occurring only at certain times) that can be the
*occasion* for anything. Hence what is meant is that—‘when one is going
to begin the study of the Veda, he should clasp the Teacher’s feet, and
having done that he should recite the words of the Veda and it does not
mean that he should clasp the Teacher’s feet every time that he may
study the Veda.

“The first moment of the act is what is called its ‘beginning’; and it
is this *beginning* that is spoken of as the *occasion*. Now it is only
what is *existent* that can form the occasion for anything; *e.g*., when
*living existence* is regarded as the occasion for the performance of
*Agnihotra*, it is the *existence* that is *present*. It is true that in
some cases, the burning of the house and such other *past* events also
are spoken of as the occasion for certain acts; but in these cases we
accept them as such because that is what is actually prescribed. In the
present instance however, the ‘beginning of study’ and ‘clasping of the
feet’ should be regarded as simultaneous.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What is called ‘beginning’ here
is the *making up of one’s mind to study*, and not the *first moment* of
the act. The Boy makes up his mind to study as soon as the Teacher
addresses to him the words ‘now read’; so that it is after this that the
feet are to be clasped. This is intended to be the propitiation of the
Teacher who is going to bestow a favour. Just as in the ordinary world,
when a person is going to bestow a favour upon another, the latte?
welcomes him with the words—‘it is through you that I have been saved
from this sin.’

This clasping of the feet is meant to embody the speechless request—‘we
are ready to proceed with our study’; for the Teacher is never to be
directed with the words ‘now teach us.’ All that is to be done is that
the Boy should approach him (and clasp his feet), with a view to remind
him that it is time for study, and it is only after this approaching has
been done, that the words of the Veda should begin to he recited.

Further, in view of the rule that ‘one should study the Veda with joined
palms,’ if the boy were to study (with joined palms), he would he
transgressing the rule regarding the *damping of feet* (if the *study*
and the were meant to he simultaneous) \[for one who would have his
hands joined could not clasp the feet\].

‘*find*’—Ceasing, desisting from study.

Though the term ‘*brahma*’ is the subordinate factor in the compound
(‘*brahmārambhe*’) yet, in as much as the term ‘end’ is a relative term,
it is taken as correlated to the term ‘*brahma*’; specially because
there is no other word in the text with which it could be connected.

‘*Always*’—implies that this rule regarding the clasping of feet should
he observed at the beginning and end of all future study, *every day*.
If this word were not present, the rule would be taken as applying to
only that ‘beginning of study’ which comes immediately after the
Initiatory Ceremony; on the analogy of the *Ārambhaṇīyā Iṣṭi*, which is
performed only at the beginning of the first sacrifice performed by the
*Agnihotrin*, after he has done the ‘Fire-kindling,’ and *not* at that
of each succeeding *pūrnamāsa*, which is performed every month.

From morning till such time as the daily routine of reciting two
Chapters has not been finished, the whole is regarded as a single act of
‘study’; so that if at intervals, there is some obstruction, the
resuming of study on the same day is not regarded as ‘beginning’; and at
each resumption, the feet are not clasped. In another *Smṛti* we
read—‘The clasping of the Teacher’s feet should be done every day in the
morning.’ Gautama, 2.53).

‘*Having joined*’—making them touch one another.

‘*Should be studied*’;—what is meant is that the hands should he placed
in that posture which resembles the tortoise.

‘*This is Brahmāñjali*’;—this explains the meaning of the term
‘*brahmāñjali*’—(71)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (.Saṃskāra, p.
532) where *Sadā* is explained as *everyday at the time of study*, and
‘*pāda-grahaṇam*’ as *saluting-*—and the second half is quoted on p.
524, as containing the definition of the ‘*Brahmāñjali*’;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 136).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.3.10.—‘The teacher’s fee? should be clasped
at both times,—at the time when one is going to read and also when he
has read.’

*Viṣṇu-Smrti*, 30, 32.—‘At the beginning and at the end of the reading
of Veda, the clasping of the teacher’s feet should be done.’

*Yājñavalkya*. 1. 26.—‘Then declaring himself—*here I am*—he should
approach the teacher for purposes of study.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 52, 59.—‘Clasping the left feet with his hand,
he should address the teacher “*Please sir teach me*”; and he should
clasp his feet at the beginning and at the end of the expounding of the
Veda.’

*Aṅgiras* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, pp. 523-524).—‘At the approach of the
Vedic lecture, and also at its close, the teacher’s feet should be
clasped, as also when one returns from a journey.’ *Āśvalāyana-Smṛti*
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 9. 524).—‘The left hand with palm upwards, and
the right with the palm downwards, the backs of the hands being firmly
attached, the thumbs being firmly steady,—this attitude of the hands is
called *Brahmāñjali*, because of its having been adopted first of all by
Brahmā. This has to be adopted at the beginning of Vedic study, also at
its completion, during the Brahmayajña, and also during the time that
the *Sāvitrī* is being taught.’

*Saṃvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 9. 524).—‘Then he should road the
Veda, looking at the teacher’s face, keeping the hands in control,
placed over the knees.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

071	At the beginning and at the end of (a lesson in the) Veda he must always clasp both the feet of his teacher, (and) he must study, joining his hands; that is called the Brahmangali (joining the palms for the sake of the Veda).
</details>
