+++
title = "072 व्यत्यस्त-पाणिना कार्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The clasping op the teacher’s feet should be done with crossed hands: the left should be touched with the left and the right with the right.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उपसंग्रहणं पूर्वश्लोके गुरोर् उक्तं तद् **व्यत्यस्तपाणिना कार्यम्** । कीदृशः पुनः पाण्योर् व्यत्यासः कर्तव्य इत्य् अत आह । **सव्येन** हस्तेन **सव्यः** पादः **स्प्रष्टव्यः** स्पर्शः कर्तव्यः, न तु चिरं निपीड्यासितव्यम् । एष च व्यत्यासो युगपद् इतरेतरदिक्संचारेण हस्तयोर् भवति । अग्रतः स्थितेन संमुखेन **गुरोर् उपसंग्रहणं** कर्तव्यम् । तत्र वामो दक्षिणमार्गं नीयते, दक्षिणो वामम् इत्य् एवं **सव्येन सव्यः** स्पृष्टो भवति, **दक्षिणेन च दक्षिण** इत्य् एष पाणिव्यत्यासः । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु "विन्यस्तपाणिना" इति पठन्ति । स्पर्शाद् एव च विन्यासे सिद्धे नाग्नितप्तायःपिण्डस्पर्शनवद् दाहभयाद् अङ्गुल्यग्रमात्रेण स्पर्शनं न[^२४५] कर्तव्यम्, अपि तु हस्तौ विन्यसितव्यौ निधातव्यौ । पीडनं तु पीडाकरं निषिद्धम् इति वर्णयन्ति ॥ २.७२ ॥


[^२४५]:
     J omits: na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘clasping of the Teacher’s feet’ mentioned in the preceding verse
‘*should be done with crossed hands*.’

In answer to the question as to what sort of the ‘crossing’ of hands
should be done, the Author adds—‘*the left*’ foot ‘*should be touched
with the left*’ hand; it is mere touching that should be done, the
Teacher should not be troubled by the foot being held for a long time.
This ‘crossing’ is obtained by the two hands being simultaneously moved
towards one another. That is, the feet having to be clasped by the pupil
standing in front of the Teacher; the left hand is moved towards the
right and the right towards the left; it is thus that the left foot
becomes touched by the left hand and the right foot by the right hand.
This is the ‘crossing of the hands.’

Others read the text as ‘*vinyastapāṇinā*,’ ‘with well-placed hands.’
The ‘placing’ being implied by the *touching*, what the addition of the
epithet would imply is that the feet should not be touched merely with
the finger tips,—in the way in which a red-hot piece of iron is touched,
for fear of burning,—but the hands should be ‘well-plaed,’ actually held
upon the feet. Pressing of the feet would cause pain to the Teacher, and
is as such prohibited. Such is the explanation provided of this version
of the text.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 455), where it is
explained that the ‘left’ and ‘right’ of the second half stand for the
left and right *feet*; so that the meaning is that the left foot of the
teacher should be touched by the left hand and the right one by the
right hand; and it quotes Baudhāyann laying down that the pupil should
pass his hands from the knee downwards to the foot.

A similar explanation is given also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p.
300).

The verse is quoted also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 52.1);—in *Aparārka*
(p. 55), as laying down the ‘feet clasping’ of the teacher;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 40), which says that ‘*spraṣṭavyaḥ*’ goes with
‘*gurucaraṇaḥ*’ understood;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 103),
which explains the meaning to be that the left and right feet of the
teacher are to be touched with the left and right hands respectively.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 58.—‘The clasping of the teacher’s feet.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 6. 1.—‘Every day on meeting, the feet of the
teacher should be clasped.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (Aparārka, p. 55).—‘Also daily in the morning, as
well as at the beginning and end of Vedic lectures.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.5.21-22.—‘With the right hand clasping the
right foot, he should touch it both up and down, along with the
ankle;—according to others, the two feet should he clasped with the two
hands.’

*Āpastamba* (Aparārka, p. 55).—‘At sunrise, he shall meet the teacher
and clasp his feet.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 2. 26.—‘Clasping the right foot with the
right, and the left with the left hand, one obtains long life and goes
to heaven.’

*Paithīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 455).—‘With the palms of the
two hands turned upwards, he should clasp the two feet of the teacher,
the right with the right and the left with the left.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. V56).—‘The clasping of the
teacher’s feet should be done.’

*Baudhāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 300).—‘Touching his ears,
concentrating his mind, he shall touch the teacher below his knees down
to his feet, this is *feet-clasping*.’

*Atri* (Aparārka, p. 55).—‘Ordinarily one should salute by raising the
right band; hands should be joined in saluting a Vedic scholar; in the
case of the teacher, the feet should he clasped.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

072	With crossed hands he must clasp (the feet) of the teacher, and touch the left (foot) with his left (hand), the right (foot) with his right (hand).
</details>
