+++
title = "074 ब्रह्मणः प्रणवम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should always pronounce the Praṇava in the beginning and at the end of the Veda. if it is not accompanied by the syllable ‘oṃ’ in the beginning, it trickles away; and (if it is not accompanied by it) at the end, it becomes shattered.—(74)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्रापि पूर्वोक्तेन न्यायेन **ब्रह्मण आदाव् अन्ते च प्रणवं कुर्यात्** । ब्रह्मविषयाया अध्ययनक्रियाया इति द्रष्टव्यम् । **प्रणव**शब्द ॐकारवचनः । तथा च वक्ष्यति- **स्रवत्य् अन्ॐकृतम्** इति । **सर्वदा**ग्रहणम् अध्ययनविधिमात्रधर्मो यथा स्याद् इतरथा प्रकरणाद् ग्रहणार्थ एव ब्रह्मचारिणः स्यात् । अस्मिंस् तु सति यो ऽप्य् अविस्मरणार्थो यच् च "अहर् अहः स्वाध्यायम् अधीयीत" इति गृहस्थादीनाम्, तत्र सर्वत्र सिद्धं भवति । संध्याजपादौ तु स्वशब्देन विधास्यति- "एतद् अक्षरम् एतां च" (म्ध् २.७८) इति । न चायं वेदधर्मो येन यत्र कुत्रचिद् वैदिकवाक्योच्चारणम् आरभेत, तत्र प्राप्नुयात् । अतो होममन्त्रजपशास्त्रानुवचनयाज्यादीनाम् आरम्भे नास्ति प्रणवः, अन्यत्राप्य् उदाहरणार्थे वैदिकवाक्यव्याहारे । तस्मात् स्थितं प्राकरणिकस्वाध्यायाध्ययनविधिधर्मार्थं **सर्वदा**ग्रहणम् । प्रणवप्रयोगस्यान्वाहिकारम्भार्थता तु नित्यकालग्रहणानुवृत्त्यैव सिद्धा । 

- अस्यार्थवादः **स्रवत्य् अन्ॐकृतम्** । **पूर्वं** प्रारम्भे **अन्ॐकृतं **ब्रह्म** स्रवति** । ओमा कृतं[^२४९] ॐशब्देन संस्कृतम् । साधनं कृतेति समासः । अथ वा ॐकृत[^२५०] उच्चारितो यस्मिन् ब्रह्मणि तद् ॐकृतं सुखादित्वात् परनिपातः । **परस्ताच्** च समाप्तौ । चकारेणान्ॐकृतम् इति संबध्यते । **स्रवति विशीर्यति** इत्य् उभाभ्याम् अपि नैष्फल्यम् अध्ययनस्य प्रतिपाद्यते । अधीतं ब्रह्म यस्मिन् कर्मणि विनियुज्येत तन् निष्फलं भवतीति निन्दार्थवादश् च । पाकार्थं निषिक्तस्याप्राप्तपाकक्षीरादेर् अवच्छिद्रिते भाजने य इतस् ततो विक्षेपः प्रक्षरणं तत् स्रवतीत्य् उच्यते । लब्धपाकस्य[^२५१] पिण्डीभूतस्य भोग्यतां प्राप्तस्य यो विनाशः स विशरणम् ॥ २.७४ ॥


[^२५१]:
     M G: tac ca pākasya


[^२५०]:
     M G: oṃkṛtam


[^२४९]:
     M G: om iti kṛtaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Here also, in accordance with what has gone before (under 71), ‘*one
should pronounce the Praṇava in the beginning and at the end of the
Veda*’;—which means that the syllable is to be pronounced in the
beginning and at the end of the action of reading the Veda.

The term ‘*praṇava*’ stands for the syllabic ‘*oṃ*’; as is clear from
what the text adds later on—‘not accompanied *by the syllable oṃ*.’

‘*Always*’—has been added in order to show that the rule applies to
every act of study. Without this term it would appear, from the context,
that it applies to only that *first* study by the Religious Student
which is done for the getting up of the text. When the adverb ‘always’
has been added, it becomes clear that the rule applies to all forms of
studying,—that which is done for the purpose of keeping the memory of
the text fresh, or that which is done by the Householder and other
people in obedience to the injunction that ‘the Veda should be studied
every day.’ As regards the reciting of Vedic mantras during the Twilight
Prayer, etc., the use of the syllable ‘oṃ’ the author is going to enjoin
directly (in Verse 78). What is laid down here is not meant to be a
necessary accompaniment of the Veda,—which would mean that the rule is
to be followed whenever one pronounces any Vedic passage; thus it is
that the Praṇava is not used with Vedic mantras on the following
occasions: at oblations poured into fire, or during the *japa* of
mantras, or in course of the teaching of scriptures, or at the
recitation of the ‘*Yājyā*’ and other hymns, or when Vedic passages are
quoted only by way of illustration. From all this it follows that the
adverb ‘*always*’ is meant to show only that the rule laid down applies
to that study of the Veda which forms the subject-matter of the context.
As for the necessity of using the *Praṇava* at the beginning of one’s
daily study, this is secured by the construing of the term ‘always’ of
the preceding verse with the present one.

In praise of what has been enjoined the text adds—‘*If it is not
accompanied by the syllable oṁ*, etc.’ If, in the beginning, the Veda is
not accompanied by the syllable ‘oṃ,’ *it trickles off*. The compound
‘*anoṅkṛtam*’ is to be expounded as ‘that which is not
*accompanied*,—*i.e*., sanctified—by the syllable *oṃ*’ according to
Pāṇini, 2. 1. 32; or, it may be expounded as ‘that Veda in which the
syllable *oṁ* is not uttered,’—the order of the terms in this case being
in accordance with the rule laid down in connection with the ‘*Sukhādi*’
group, according to Pāṇini, 6. 2. 170.

‘*At the end*’—at the close. The particle ‘and’ indicates that the term
‘not accompanied by the syllable *om*’ is to be construed here also.

‘*Trickles off-—becomes shattered*.’—Both these terms are meant to
indicate the futility of the study. The sense being that that religious
act, in which the Veda studied in the said defective fashion is used,
absolutely fails to accomplish its purpose. This is an *Arthavāda* meant
to be deprecatory of the said method of study. When milk is placed in a
pot, the milks passes off all round; and this is what is called
‘*trickling off*’; and if the milk becomes destroyed after it has been
boiled and become solidified, this is what is called ‘*becoming
shattered*.’—(74)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Viśīryati* ’—*avasthitim na labhate*, ‘does not obtain any standing’
(Kullūka);—‘becomes absolutely useless’ (Medhātithi);—‘is not
understood’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa),

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 99);—in *Vidhānapārijāta*
(p. 521);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 136) in support of the
view that the *Praṇava* should he pronounced at the close of the reading
also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Apastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 4. 13. 16.—‘The syllable *Om* is the gate of
Heaven; therefore when going to read the Veda, one should begin with
it.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 30,33.—‘The Praṇava should be pronounced.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

074	Let him always pronounce the syllable Om at the beginning and at the end of (a lesson in) the Veda; (for) unless the syllable Om precede (the lesson) will slip away (from him), and unless it follow it will fade away.
</details>
