+++
title = "075 प्राक्-कूलान् पर्युपासीनः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Seated upon Kuśa-blades pointing eastwards and sanctified by Kuśa-blades, when one has purified himself by means of three ‘breath-suspensions,’—then alone he becomes entitled to the syllable ‘oṃ.’—(76)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कूल**शब्दो दर्भाग्रवचनः । तान् **पर्युपासीनः** तेषु प्रागग्रेषु दर्भेषूपविष्ट इत्य् अर्थः । "अधिशीङ्स्थासाम्" (पाण् १.४.४६) स्था आ आसाम् इत्य् आङा प्रश्लेषात् कर्मत्वम् । परि उप आ आसीन इति इहाप्य् आङा श्लिष्टनिर्दिष्टो द्रष्टव्यः । पर्युपशब्दाव् अनर्थकौ । 

- **पवित्रैर्** दर्भैर् **एव पावितः**[^२५२] शुचित्वम् आपादितः । अघमर्षणादिस् तु[^२५३] मन्त्रो नेह पवित्रशब्देनोच्यते, ब्रह्मचारिणस् तदानीम् अनधीतत्वात् तेषाम् । न च दर्भाः स्वसत्तामात्रेण कांचित् क्रियाम् अकुर्वतः पावने करणं भवन्तीति । अवान्तरव्यापारापेक्षया स्मृत्यन्तरे प्राणोपस्पर्शनं प्रतीयते । आह च गौतमः- "प्राणोपस्पर्शनं दर्भैः । प्राक्कूलेष्व् आसनं च" (ग्ध् १.४८, ५०) । 


[^२५३]:
     M G 1st ed.: -marṣaṇādiṣu


[^२५२]:
     M G 1st ed.: evam āditaḥ

- **प्राणायामैस् त्रिभिः पूतः** । मुखनासिकासंचारी वायुः प्राणस् तस्यायामो निरोधः शरीरे धारणंम्,बहिर् निष्क्रमणनिषेधः, तस्य स्मृत्यन्तरे धरणकालस्य मानं समाम्नातम् । मन्त्रानुस्मरणं च । 

- प्रतिप्रणवसंयुक्तां गायत्रीं शिरसा सह ।

- त्रिर् जपेद् आयतप्राणः प्राणायामः स उच्यते ॥ (च्ड़्। वध् २५.१३)

वसिष्ठेन भगवता महाव्याहृतयो ऽप्य् उक्ताः । मन्त्रावसान एव निरोधावधिर् अन्यस्यानाम्नातत्वात् सर्वस्मृतीनां चासति विरोध एकार्थत्वाद् इहाप्य् एवम् एवानुष्ठानम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> एवम् इतरेतराश्रयः स्याद् अकृतेषु[^२५४] प्राणायामेषु ॐकारो न कर्तव्यः, न च्ॐकारेण विना प्राणायामो निवर्तते । <u>नैष</u> दोषः । "त्रिर् जपेत्" इति प्राणायामेषु मानसव्यापारेण्ॐकारस्य स्मरणम् उच्यते । न हि निरुद्धप्राणस्य शब्दोच्चरणं संभवति । यद्य् अपि जपः कश्चिद् वाग्व्यापारसाध्यो भवति । स्वाध्यायाध्ययने तु पुनर् उच्चारणं विवक्षितम् । अध्ययनक्रियाया एवंरूपत्वाच् छब्दक्रियायां ह्य् अयं[^२५५] धातुः, श्रोत्रग्राह्यश् च शब्दो न केवलेन मनसा गृह्यते । 


[^२५५]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: hy ayaṃ


[^२५४]:
     J: kṛteṣu

- न चायम् ॐकारधर्मो येनान्यत्रापि तस्मिन्न् उच्चार्यमाणे ऽपि प्रसज्येत । उक्तं च "स्वाध्यायारम्भे कर्तव्यः" इति । ॐकारधर्मत्वे हि लौकिकेषु वाक्येष्व् ओम् इति ब्रूम इत्यादिषु प्रसज्येत । गौतमेन तु पठितम्- "प्राणायामास् त्रयः पञ्चदश मात्राः" इति (ग्ध् १.४९) । मात्राशब्देन चाविकृतस्य स्वरस्याकारादेर् यावान् कालः स उच्यते । तत्र विरोधात् स्मृत्यन्तरोक्तः कालो नास्ति, न च मन्त्रस्मरणं तत्रान्ॐकारा अपि प्राणायामाः सन्तीति नेतरेतराश्रयदोषापत्तिः । **तत ॐकारम् अर्हति** कर्तुम् इति शेषः । यदायं समुदाय एव रूढिरूपेण प्रणववचनः । यदा तु करणं कारः । ओम् इत्य् एतस्य कार उच्चारणम् ॐकारस् तदा नास्ति पदान्तरापेक्षा । प्रणवशब्देन कर्तव्यताम् उक्त्वात्र्ॐकारम् इत्य् अनुवदत्य् अत एताव् एकार्थौ । तथा च दर्शितम् ॥ २.७५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*kūṭa*’ means ‘kuśa-blade’;—‘*Seated upon*’ them,—*i.e*.,
seated upon kuśa-blades pointing eastwards. The accusative ending in
‘*kūṭān*’ being in accordance with Pāniṇi 1. 4. 46, ‘*adhisthīnsthāsām
karma*,’ where the latter part consists of the factors
‘*athā*’—‘*ā*’—‘*āsām*.’ In the word ‘*paryupāsīnaḥ*’ also we have an
‘*ā*’, the word containing the factors
‘*pari*’—‘*upa*’—‘*ā*’—‘*āsīnaḥ*’; the prefixes ‘*pari*’ and ‘*upa*’
having no significance at all.

‘*Sanctified by kuśa-blades*’;—*i.e*., having been made pure. The term
‘*pavitra*’ cannot stand for the *Aghamarṣaṇa* and other mantras; for
the simple reason that at the time that the text is being dealt with,
the student has not read those *mantras*. Nor are kuśa-blades capable,
by their mere presence, to bring about purification for one who does no
(purificatory) act; thus then, the necessity of some intervening act
being essential, we are led to conclude, on the basis of another
*Smṛti*, that this act is in the form of *touching the sense-organs*;
Gautama (1.48-50) having prescribed ‘the touching of the organs with
Kuśa-blades and seating upon Kuśa-blades pointing eastwards.’

‘*Purified by means of three Breath-suspensions*’—The air passing
through the mouth and the nostrils is called ‘*prāṇa*,’ ‘breath’; and
the ‘*āyāma*’ of this is its *suspension, holding within the body,
preventing its going out*. Another *Smṛti* (Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra*, 23)
has laid down the measure of the time during which the breath is to be
suspended—as also the mantra accompanying it,—“One, witholding his
breath, should mutter three times the *Gāyatrī* along with the *Praṇava*
and the *Śiras*,—this is what is called ‘Breath-suspension’.” The
revered Vaśiṣṭha has added to these the *Great Vyāhṛtis* also. It is the
end of the mantra that should mark the end of the *suspension*, no other
limit for it being prescribed. In as much as all Smṛtis are meant to
serve the same purpose, we must accept this same method of
‘Breath-suspension’ to be meant by the present text also, specially as
there is no inconsistency with it.

*Objection*.—“What has been said here involves a mutual interdependence:
until the Breath-suspensions have been performed one should not
pronounce ‘Oṃ,’ while without this syllable ‘Oṃ’ there can be no
‘Breath-suspension’.”

There is nothing wrong in this. When Yājñavalkya lays down that ‘one
should mutter three times; etc.,’ all that is meant is the mental act of
*remembering, thinking of*, the syllable ‘*Oṃ*’; for when the breath is
suspended, there can be no *utterance* of any syllable; though it is
true that ‘*Japa*,’ ‘Reciting,’ is (in most cases) something that can be
accomplished only by an operation of speech. In connection with the
reading of the Veda however, what is intended is actual *utterance* of
the syllable; and this for the simple reason that the act of reading
consists of actual utterance—the root (in ‘*adhyayana*’) signify ing the
*waking of sound*, and *sound* is that which is heard by the *Ear*, and
not that which is cognised only by the mind.

What is prescribed here is not something applicable to the syllable ‘Oṃ’
itself,—whereby it could be made applicable to the uttering of the
syllable on other occasions also. It has been said that the syllable
should be pronounced at the beginning of Vedic study; but if the. rule
here laid down were meant to be applicable to all utterances of the
syllable, it would have to be observed in connection with such
utterances of it in ordinary parlance as when one says ‘we say *yes*
(oṃ).’

Then again, Gautama (l.49) has declared that. ‘the three
Breath-suspensions extend over fifteen moments.’ The term ‘*mātrā*,’
‘moment,’ stands for that point of time which is taken up in the
pronouncing of a simple unmodified vowel; and in as much as this cannot
be consistent with the time-limit prescribed by Yājñavalkya, this latter
cannot be accepted as applicable to what is prescribed by Gautama; in
which connection again no mantras are laid down. From this it is clear
that there can be ‘Breath-suspensions’ even without the uttering of the
syllable ‘oṃ.’ And thus there need be no mutual interdependence.

Then alone does the man ‘*become entitled to the syllable oṃ*’;—*i.e*.,
to the ‘pronouncing’ of the syllable,—the word ‘pronouncing’ having to
be supplied if the entire term ‘*oṅkāra*’ is taken as standing for the
*Praṇava*. If however we take the term ‘*kār*’ separately in the sense
of *making*,—so that ‘*oṁkāra*’ means the *making* or *uttering* of the
syllable ‘oṃ,’—then we do not need to supply any other word. The
uttering of the syllable having been laid down (under 74), where it is
called ‘*praṇava*’;—the term ‘*oṅkāra*’ in the present sense simply
serves the purpose of explaining what that ‘*praṇava*’ is.

So that ‘*praṇava*’ and ‘*oṅkāra*’ are synonymous terms; as we have
already pointed out (in the Bhāṣya on 74).—(75)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pavitraiḥ*’—‘Kuśa-blades—by which the seat of the vital airs is
touched’—(Medhātithi);—‘The *Aghamarṣaṇa*’ and other Vedic texts (noted
by Medhātithi, but rejected by him, though adopted by Nandana). Burnell
has translated the term as ‘grass-rings on the third finger’;—this is in
exact conformity with the present usage, where a blade of Kuśa, twisted
into the form of a ring, is worn on the third finger on the occasion of
all religious ceremonies.

This verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 521);—in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Saṃskāra, p. 522), which explains ‘*prākkūlān*’ as *prāgagrān*
‘pointing eastwards’,—and ‘*pavitraiḥ*’ simply as ‘*pāranaiḥ*’
‘purificatories’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 49), which explains
‘*prākkūlān*’ as ‘with tips pointing towards the east’;—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 316) which has the same explanations and adds
that it refers to Kuśa-blades;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 135)
which has the same explanation and explains ‘*pavitraiḥ*’ as
purificatory;—also in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 471).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.51-56.—‘The sense-organs should be touched with
Kuśa-blades;—there should be three Breath-suspensions, of fifteen units;
and the seat should be on Kuśa-grass pointing eastwards.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2.4.5,7.—‘At the commencement of the
performance of all acts, as also before the Twilight Prayers, one should
sprinkle himself with the sanctifying blades and thereby prepare
himself;—to this effect it is declared that seated on Kuśa-blades,
holding Kuśa-blades in the hand, sprinkling himself with water, one
should repeat the Gāyatrī a thousand times;—being purified with three
Breath-suspensions.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 254).—‘Seated on Kuśa-blades
pointing eastwards, with mind collected, he should perform throe
Breath-suspensions and then the Twilight Prayers.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

075	Seated on (blades of Kusa grass) with their points to the east, purified by Pavitras (blades of Kusa grass), and sanctified by three suppressions of the breath (Pranayama), he is worthy (to pronounce) the syllable Om.
</details>
