+++
title = "078 एतद् अक्षरम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Reciting, at the two twilights, this syllable and this verse, preceded by the Vyāhṛtis, the Brāhmaṇa, learned in the Veda, becomes endowed with Vedic merit.—(78)


prāpte karmaṇi nāneko vidhātuṃ śakyate guṇaḥ | 
aprāpte tu vidhīyante vahavo'pyekapatnataḥ |
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि स्वाध्यायविधिप्रकरण एकवाक्यात्[^२५७] संध्याजपविधिर् अयम् । तत्र गायत्र्या अनुवादः, प्रणवव्याहृतीनाम् अप्राप्तविधिः ।


[^२५७]:
     M G: -prakaraṇaikavākyāt; J: -prakaraṇe vākyāt; my conjectural emendation is based on the necessity of a locative to parallel sati. Probably the double sandhi was used in MG (-raṇa + eka- = raṇaika).

- <u>अत्र</u> कश्चिद् आह । नायं संध्याविधिर् अप्रकरणात् । विधिर् हि भवन् ब्रह्मचारिणः स्यात्, तस्य प्रकृतत्वात् । न च तस्य संभवति । इह हि **वेदविद्** इत्य् उच्यते । न च तस्य प्रथमोपनीतस्य वेदवित्त्वम् अस्ति । अपि च फलम् अत्र श्रूयते- **वेदपुण्येन युज्यते** । नित्यस्य संध्योपासनविधिः न फलार्थः । न चैतद् विद्मः किम् इदं वेदपुण्यं नाम फलं येन योगो ऽयं जप उच्यते । यदि तावद् वेदाध्ययनत्वाद् यत्[^२५८] पुण्यम् अभिप्रेतं तदवाप्तिर् वेदपुण्येन योगो ऽभिप्रेतस् तत्र यः तावद् अयं प्रकृतः स्वाध्यायविधिस् तस्य नार्थावबोधाद् ऋते किंचित् पलम् अस्त्य् अश्रुतत्वाद् दृष्टत्वाच् चार्थावबोधस्य कल्पनापि नास्ति । यश् च गृहस्थादीनां विधिः "अहर् अहः स्वाध्यायम् अधीयीत" इति, सो ऽपि नित्य एव । यत् तत्र फलश्रवणं "पयो दधि घृतं मधु" इति, सो ऽर्थवाद एव । तस्मान् नायं विधिः । विधौ हि सर्वम् एतद् विवक्षितव्यम् । यदा त्व् अयम् अर्थवादस् तदा **जपन्** इति प्रकृतम् अध्ययनम् उच्यते, **वेदपुण्येन** इत्य् एतद् अपि यथाकथंचिन् नीयते । 


[^२५८]:
     J omits: yat

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । वाक्येन प्रकरणं बाध्यत इत्य् उक्तम् एव । यत एव वेदवित्पदं संध्यापदं च न प्रकृतविषयतयान्वेति,[^२५९] तत एवान्यत्रायम् विधिः । संध्ययोर् एतत् त्रयं जपेद् इत्य् एतावान् विधिः । वेदवित्पदम् अनुवदिष्यते । गृहस्थादीनां वेदवित्त्वस्य संभवात् ब्रह्मचारिणो वेदवित्त्वं न संभवतीति चेत्, किं तदीयेन संभवेन । यथा प्राप्तानुवादे हि सर्वाश्रमिणाम् अधिकारः । कर्तृविशेषणे हि वेदवित्पदे ब्रह्मचारिणो नाधिकारः स्यात् । कथं पुनर् अस्यानुवादः । वाक्यभेदप्रसङ्गात् । विधौ संध्याविधौ प्राप्ते प्रणवव्याहृतयस् तावद् अप्राप्तास् तत्र विधातव्याः । तत्र यद्य् अपरं वेदविद् इति[^२६०] विधीयते तदा वाक्यभेदः स्यात् । प्राप्ते हि कर्मणि नानेकार्थविधानं संभवति । प्रणवव्याहृतीनां तु नानुवादः संभवति । 


[^२६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: vedavidi


[^२५९]:
     M G 1st ed.: -viṣayatayābhyeti

- तेनायम् अत्र वाक्यार्थः । संध्ययोर् यत् सावित्रीं जपेद् इत्य् उक्तं तत्रायम् अपरो गुणः प्रणवव्याहृतिपूर्विकां ताम् जपेत् । विप्रग्रहणं च तदा प्रदर्शनार्थम् एव । 

- <u>यद् अप्य्</u> उक्तम्- फलम् अत्र श्रूयते, नित्यश् चायं विधिः संध्यायाः । <u>को नामायं</u> विरोधः । नित्य एव तस्मिन् गुणे कामो भविष्यति । प्रणवव्याहृतिगुणकात् तस्माद् इदं फलम् इति । यथा गोदोहनप्रणयनकाद् अग्निहोत्रात् पशवः फलम्- "गोदोहनेन पशुकामस्य प्रणयेत्" इति वाक्यसामर्थ्येन । अध्येतुश् चैतद् उक्तम्, न त्व् अयं काम्यो विधिः । स्मृत्यन्तरे हि नित्य एवायं विधिः स्पष्ट एवोक्तः- 

- गायत्रीं शिरसा सार्धं जपेद् व्याहृतिपूर्विकाम् । इति । (य्ध् १.२३)

फलानाम् अवगमो[^२६१] भवतैवोक्तः ।


[^२६१]:
     G: avagame

- अयं ह्य् अर्थो **वेदपुण्येन्**एति । वेदे यत् संध्योपासनात् पुण्यम् उक्तं तेन त्रिकम् एतज् जपन् युज्यते, न केवलं गायत्रीम् । पुण्यं च धर्मः, वेदमूलत्वात् स्मृतीनां स्मृत्युक्तम् अपि वेदपुण्यतया व्यपदिश्यते, वेदस्य पुण्यं वेदपुण्यम् । किं च वेदस्य पुण्यम् । यत् तेन प्रतिपाद्यते । पठ्यमानद् वेदाद् यज् जायते, तद् अपि शक्यते तस्येति वक्तुम्, किं त्व् असाधारणत्वात् प्रतिपाद्यम् एव युक्तं व्यपदेष्टुं नोत्पाद्यम् । यागादयो धर्मम् उत्पादयन्ति, प्रतिपादकस् तु वेद एव । 

- <u>ये ऽप्य्</u> अन्त्यस्य पादस्य सामर्थ्यम् आहुः- यद् उक्तं "नित्यस्वाद्यायः" इति तत्र संध्यायां त्रिकजपाद् एव कृतार्था भवन्तीति । <u>तद् अप्य्</u> असत् । एवं सति तेन विधिना विकल्पेत । तत्र च पाक्षिको नित्यस्वाध्ययताया बाधः स्यात् । न चाबाधे संभवति बाधो ऽभ्युपगन्तव्यः । 

- **एतद् अक्षरम्** इत्य् ॐकारस्य प्रतिनिर्देशः । 

- <u>ननु</u> च नैतद् एकम् अक्षरम् । द्वे वा त्रीणि वा । <u>उच्यते</u> । अक्षरशब्देन केवलं स्वर उच्यते, व्यञ्जनसंयोगश् च । तत्रेह यादृशः प्रकृतः तादृशस्याभिधानम् । 

**एतां च** "तत् सवितुर् वरेण्यम्" इति सावित्रीम् । व्याहृतयः पूर्वा यस्यास् ताम् **व्याहृतिपूर्विकां** । तिस्रः प्रकृता एव ता व्याहृतयो गृह्यन्ते, प्रकृतपरत्वाद् अस्य, न सप्त सत्यान्ताः ॥ २.७८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though this verse is syntactically connected with the section dealing
with the Injunction of Vedic study, yet it is to be taken as embodying
the injunction of recitation during the Twilight-Prayers; and as regards
the ‘*Gāyatrī*’-verse itself, the mention of it (in the present verse)
is merely for the purposes of *reference* (the injunction of its
recitation having already gone before), while that of the *Praṇava* and
the *Vyāhṛtis* forms the direct injunction of the recitation of these,
which has not been enjoined anywhere else.

To this some people make the following objection:—

“This cannot be regarded as an Injunction pertaining to the Twilight
Prayers; as these do not form the subject-matter of the present context.
Even if it was an injunction, it could only be one pertaining to the
Religious Student; as it is the Student whose duties are being
propounded in the present context. But this is not possible, since the
text has added the qualification ‘*learned in the Veda*’; and certainly
the student just initiated could never be ‘learned in the Veda.’
Further, the text also adds a particular fruit—‘*becomes endowed with
Vedic merit*’; while the Injunction of the Twilight-Prayers is a
compulsory one. Then again, we do not understand what is this fruit,
called ‘Vedic merit’ which is described as proceeding from the
recitation. If what is meant is the merit proceeding from the recitation
of the Veda, and if the attaining of this merit is what is meant by
being ‘endowed with Vedic merit’—then, in regard to this view it has to
be noted that so far as the Injunction of Veda-reciting is
concerned—which forms the subject-matter of the present context,—there
can be no other result proceeding from it, except the understanding of
the meaning of tho Vedic texts; for the simple reason that no such
result has been anywhere mentioned. Further, in as much as there is a
perceptible result in the shape of the comprehension of meaning, there
can be no room for the assuming of any other results. The injunction of
Veda-reciting that there is for the Householder and others,—in the words
‘day after day one should recite the Veda’—this also is a compulsory
one; and the results mentioned in connection with it, in the shape of
‘milk, and honey, etc.,’ this is only a valedictory supplement. From all
this it is clear that the present verse cannot be regarded as an
Injunction (of recitation during the Twilight Prayers). Specially as, if
it were taken as an Injunction, all the above difficulties will have to
be explained. On the other band, if the verse be taken as a valedictory
reference, then the term ‘reciting’ could be taken as referring to the
Reciting of the Veda, which forms the subject-matter of the context; and
in that case it would be possible to construe the term ‘Vedic merit’
also in some way or the other.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—

It has been already explained that the implications of context are
always set aside by those of Syntactical Connection; and for the very
reason that the terms ‘learned in the Veda’ and ‘Twilight prayers’ are
not connected with the subject-matter of the context,—the present
Injunction is to be taken as pertaining to something else. The
Injunction is simply to the effect that during the two Twilight Prayers
one should pronounce the three expressions (*Om—Sāvitrī
verse*—*Vyāhṛtis*); and the term ‘learned in the Veda’ is merely
descriptive?

“But as a matter of fact, it is possible only for persons in the
Householder and other stages to be ‘learned in the Veda’; the Student
can never be so.

What has this *possibility* got to do with the matter? If the term is
taken as merely descriptive of what is already known from other sources,
then the injunction contained in the verse becomes applicable to people
in all stages of life. While if the term ‘learned in the Veda’ were
taken as a significant epithet of the Nominative agent (of the act
enjoined), then the student would not be entitled to the act.

“Why should the term be taken as merely descriptive?”

For the simple reason that there would (otherwise) be a syntactical
split. The injunction pertaining to the Injunction of the Twilight
Prayers, what has to be enjoined regarding it is the reciting of the
*Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis*, which has not been enjoined anywhere else,
Now, if in addition to these, something else were taken as enjoined,—in
the form of ‘being learned in the Veda,’—then there would be a
syntactical split \[the sentence in question containing two injunctions,
(*a*) ‘should recite the Praṇava, etc.,’ and (*b*) ‘should learn the
Veda’\]; and it is not legitimate to enjoin (by means of a single
sentence) several details pertaining to an act already enjoined. Nor is
it possible (as another alternative) to take the mention of the
*Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis* as merely descriptive \[because their
injunction has not been met with anywhere else\].

From all this it follows that what the Text means is as follows:—‘In
connection with the *reciting of the Gāyatrī* that has been enjoined in
relation to the Twilight Prayers, there is this further detail that the
said recitation is to lie preceded by the uttering of the *Praṇava* and
the *Vyāhṛtis*.’

The mention of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa'* is only by way of illustration.

It has been argued above that—“the text speaks of a result, while the
Injunction of the Twilight Prayers is a compulsory one.”

But what inconsistency is there in this? While what is enjoined is a
compulsory act, the result mentioned may follow from the further detail
mentioned in the text; the meaning being that ‘the said result follows
from the previously enjoined Twilight Prayer, when it is accompanied by
the recitation of the *Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis*. Just as when the
ordinary Agnihotra is performed with the water brought over in the
milking vessel, there comes about the particular result in the shape of
cattle; and this in (?) accordance with the injunction that ‘for one
desiring cattle water should be brought in the milking vessel.’

It is on the strength of this last injunction that we have made bold to
say what we have said above. In reality the injunction contained in the
verse is not an optional one at all (meant only for those desiring the
particular result mentioned). Specially as another *Smṛti* (Yājñavalkya,
1. 23) clearly lays it down as a compulsory injunction—‘One should
recite the *Gāyatrī* along with the *Śiras*, preceded by the
*Vyāhṛtis*.’

Further, you have yourself argued that the exact nature of the result
(‘Vedic merit’) cannot be ascertained (which is an argument against the
text being taken as laying down a result). As a matter of fact, what
‘Vedic merit’ means is as follows:—‘The merit that has been described in
the Veda as resulting from the saying of the Twilight Prayers accrues to
man only when he recites all the three expressions—and not by reciting
the *Gāyatrī* only.’ ‘*Puṇya*,’ ‘*merit*,’ is *excellence*. Since
*Smṛtis* are based upon the *Veda*, what is mentioned in the *Smṛtis* is
also called ‘Veda-merit,’ which last expression stands for the ‘*merit
of the Veda*.’

“What is the merit of the Veda?”

That (merit) which is expounded by the Veda. The merit that results from
the Veda being recited may also be called ‘the merit of the Veda’; but
by virtue of the specific relationship, it is what is expounded by the
Veda,—and what is *produced* by it—that should be spoken of as ‘merit of
the Veda.’ As for the *producing* of merit, this is done by other things
also, such as sacrificial performances and the like; while the
*expounding* of it is done by the Veda only.

Some people have taken the last foot of the Verse to mean as
follows—“What has been enjoined as compulsory Vedic Study becomes
fulfilled merely by reciting the three expressions during the Twilight
Prayers.”

But this is not right. For if the present text meant this, then it would
be providing an option to what has been laid down as the compulsory
‘Vedic Study’; and this would mean the partial rejection of this study.
But so long as we can avoid it, it is not right to admit the rejection
of any injunction.

‘*This syllable*’—refers to the syllable ‘*oṃ*.’

“But this is not a single *letter*, containing as it does, two or three
syllables.”

Our answer is that the term ‘syllable’ here stands for ‘vowel-sound’ and
‘contact with consonants.’ Hence the term denotes that which forms the
subject-matter of the context.

‘*This Verse*’—*i.e*., the *Sāvitrī* verse ‘*tat saviturvareṇyam*, etc.’

‘*Preceded by the Vyāhṛtis*;’—*i.e*., that before which the *Vyāhṛtis*
have been uttered. Here only the *three Vyāhṛtis* are meant,—these alone
having been mentioned in the present context (in verse 76),—and not the
*seven*, ending with ‘*Satyam*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P.111,1.11)—*Prāpte hi karmaṇi*, *&c*.’—This is a
paraphrase of Kumārila’s dictum—

> *prāpte karmaṇi nāneko vidhātuṃ śakyate guṇaḥ* \|  
> *aprāpte tu vidhīyante vahavo'pyekapatnataḥ* \|

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 50), which explains
‘*etadakṣaram*’ as the Praṇava;—and in *Nityāchārapaddhati*, (p. 189).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 78-79)  
**

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 1220).—‘The Brāhmaṇa stealing gold, or killing a
Brāhmaṇa, or violating the teacher’s bed, or drinking wine, becomes
absolved from the sin by repeating the Gāyatrī a *lakh* of times.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘The syllable *om*, the Vyāhṛtis and the Sāvitrī
constitute the *Sāvitra Pavitra*, by which one becomes absolved from all
sins; by repeating it a hundred times he becomes purified in a month;
repeating it ten thousand times he has his soul entirely purified of all
sins.’

*Viṣṇusmṛti*, 55.12—\[reproduces the words of Manu\].

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 4.6.—‘They declare that seated on kuśa-grass,
holding kuśa-blades and water in the hand, he should repeat the Gāyatrī
a thousand times.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2.29.—‘Breath-suspensions, accompanied by the
Vyāhṛtis and the Praṇava, repeated sixteen times daily, purify even the
embryo-murderer, in a month’s time.’

*Vasiṣṭha-smṛti*, 36-5 \[reproduces the foregoing text of Baudhāyana\].

*Vasiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 1220).—‘On the commingling of all kinds of sin,
the best purification consists in repeating the Gāyatrī ten thousand
times.’

*Nṛsiṃhapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, pp. 254-255).—‘Having offered the
Evening Prayers, while the sun is still visible, he should go on
repeating the Gāyatrī till the stars become visible.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

078	A Brahmana, learned in the Veda, who recites during both twilights that syllable and that (verse), preceded by the Vyahritis, gains the (whole) merit which (the recitation of) the Vedas confers.
</details>
