+++
title = "079 सहस्रकृत्वस् त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Repeating this Triad a thousand times in open air, the twice-born person becomes freed, in a month, from even great sin, as the snake from its slough.—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**बहिर्** इत्य् अनावृतो देश उच्यते । तेनैतद् उक्तं भवति । ग्रामनगराभ्यां बहिर् अरण्ये नदीपुलिनादौ । **सहस्र**वारान् **अभ्यस्य** आवर्त्य । <u>ननु</u>[^२६२] कृत्वसुचो ऽप्य् आवृत्तिः प्रतिपाद्यते, अभ्यस्येत्य् अनेनापि । तत्र पौनरुक्त्यम् । <u>सामान्यविशेषभावाद्</u> अदोषः । **अभ्यस्येत्य्** अनेन सामान्यतो ऽभ्यास उक्तस् तत्र विशेषापेक्षायां **सहस्रकृत्वेति** । न च कृत्वसुजन्ताद् एवोभयावगतिस् तस्य क्रियाविशेषापेक्षत्वात् । न हि देवदत्तः पञ्चकृत्वो ऽह्न इत्य् उक्ते, यावद् भुङ्क्त इति नोच्यते तावाद् वाक्यार्थः समाप्यते ।


[^२६२]:
     M G: na tu

- <u>ननु</u> चाभ्यस्येत्य् अनेनापि न काचिद् विशिष्टा क्रियोपात्ता । <u>सत्यम्</u> । जपः प्रकृतस् तम् अभ्यस्येति प्रतीयते । आवृत्तिः पौनःपुण्येन सेवा ।

- **महतो ऽप्य् एनसः** । महत् पापं च ब्रह्महत्यादि । ततो ऽपि मुच्यते, किं पुनर् उपपातकेभ्यः । **अपिः** संभावने, न समुच्चये । भेदोपादानेन समुच्चयावगमो यथा देवदत्तस्यात्र प्रभुत्वं यज्ञदत्तस्यापि । इह न तथा निर्देशः । 

- <u>केभ्यः</u> पुनर् उपपातकेभ्यो ऽयं मोक्ष उच्यते । गोवधादीन्य् उपपातकानि । तानि च प्रतिपापम् आम्नातप्रायश्चित्तानि सरहस्यानि । यानि वा संवेत्ति न कृतान्य् अनुक्तपरिहाराण्य् अवश्यंभावितया च ज्ञायते कृतानीति । तेषाम् अपि नित्यानि संध्योपासनादीन्य् अपनोदकानि । यदि चैतत् प्रायश्चित्तं स्यात् तदा तत्रैवावक्ष्यत्- "जपेद् वै नियताहारः त्रिर् वै वेदस्य संहिताम्" (म्ध् ११.७६) इतिवत्[^२६३] । प्रायश्चित्ते चास्मिन् प्रायश्चित्तप्रकणम् एवानर्थकं स्यात् । को हि दैवशप्तो[^२६४] जपमात्रसाध्यां निष्कृतिं हित्वा कृच्छ्रेषु शरीरप्राणहरेष्व् अध्यवस्येत् । उक्तं च । 


[^२६४]:
     M G: daivavaśaprāpto


[^२६३]:
     M: iti cet; G: iti ca

- अर्के[^२६५] चेन् मधु विन्देत किम् अर्थं पर्वतं व्रजेत् ।


[^२६५]:
     J: atke

- इष्टस्यार्थस्य संप्राप्तौ को विद्वान् यत्नम् आचरेत् ॥

तथा,

- पणलभ्यं हि न प्राज्ञः क्रीणाति दशभिः पणैः ॥ इति ।

न च प्रकृतेनैकवाक्यताबीजं किंचिद् विभज्यमानसापेक्षत्वाद्य् अस्ति येन तच्छेषतया ऽर्थवाद उच्यते । 

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । विधिर् एवायम् । पापप्रमोचनार्थ एवायं प्रयोगः । यत् तूक्तं "विषमशिष्टैर् विकल्पो न सिध्यति" इति जपप्रायश्चित्त एवास्मिन् विकल्पार्थो भविष्यति । अघमर्षणादिभिः सर्वपापापनोदनम् उक्तम्, तेनास्य विकल्पः । अघमर्षणे हि त्र्यहम् उपवास उक्तः । इहाश्नन्न् एव मासिकेन प्रयोगेण शुध्यति । ततो न दूरविप्रकृष्टेन तपसा प्रमीयते, येन विषमशिष्टता स्यात् । 

- अथ वा पूर्वकृतस्यैनसः शुद्धिर् एषा ग्रहादौस्थित्यादिसूचिते दैवे दोषे । तस्मान् मोक्षः । अनिष्टम् एन उच्यते । तस्मान् मुच्यते । तत्फलेन न संबध्यत इत्य् अर्थः । 

- **त्वचेवहिः** । जीर्णया त्वचा मुक्तः सर्पो यथा भवति । निरवशेषेण पापनाश एतेन प्रतिपाद्यते । यत् तु दौश्चर्मादिसूचितं[^२६६] पूर्वकृतम् अशुभं तत्र स्मृत्यन्तरे प्रायश्चित्तम् आम्नातं बहु । तत् प्रायश्चित्तेष्व् एव निदर्शयिष्यामः । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्योक्तम् । 


[^२६६]:
     M G 1st ed.: dauścayādi-

- जपतां जुह्वतां चैव विनिपातो न दृश्यते । (म्ध् ४.१४६) इति ॥ २.७९॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*bahiḥ*,’ ‘in *open air*,’ stands for *uncovered spot*; the
sense being that it should be done outside towns and villages, on the
bank of rivers and such places.

‘*A thousand times, repeating*’—reciting it again and again.

“The affix ‘*kṛtvasuch*’ (in the term ‘*Sahasrakṛtvaḥ*’) also signifies
*repetition*, which is again denoted by the word ‘*abhyasya*’ also; so
there is needless repetition.”

The repetition is not objectionable, in view of a distinction between
general and particular. That is to say, the word ‘*abhyasya*’ denotes
repetition *in* *general*, and when the question arises as to the
*particular* number of repetitions, we have the text adding ‘*a thousand
times*.’ Both the general and the particular could not be regarded as
signified by the single word ending with the ‘*kṛtvasuch*’ affix;
because this latter word always stands in need of a particular act (that
has to be done a thousand times). The mere expression ‘*devadattaḥ*
*pan* *chakritvo’haḥ*,’ ‘Devadatta five times during the day’ does not
signify anything until the word ‘*bhuṅkte*,’ ‘*Eats*,’ is added.

“But the term ‘*repeating*’ also does not signify any particular *act*.”

True; but the act of *reciting* forms the subject-matter of the context;
so that the *repeating* is understood as pertaining to that act;
‘*repetition*’ standing for *attending to it again and again*.

‘*Even from great sin*’;—he becomes freed from even such heinous sins as
‘Brāhmaṇa-killing’ and the like; what to say of minor offences?

‘*Api*,’ ‘*Even*,’ denotes *possibility*, not *cumulation*; cumulation
is expressed when more things than one are mentioned separately; as in
the sentence—‘there is sovereignty of Devadatta, *and* of Yajñadatta
*also*.’ There is no such separate mention in the text.

*Question*—“From what minor offences does the man become freed?
*Cow-killing* and such acts have been regarded as ‘minor offences’; and
for every one of these the scriptures have prescribed distinct expiatory
rites along with all their details. While as regards those acts that are
not done consciously, but which are regarded as *must have been
done*,—though no definite expiation could be prescribed for them, yet
they would be got rid of by means of the Twilight Prayers and such other
compulsory rites prescribed for daily performance. Then again, if what
is mentioned in the present verse were a real expiation, it should have
come under the section on Expiatory Rites (Ch. XI); just as it is said
(under 11. 77)—‘One may recite the text of the Veda while keeping due
restraint over food.’ Further, if the present verse were meant to
prescribe an expiatory rite, the whole section dealing with Expiatory
Rites (Ch. XI) would he superfluous. For, what accused person would omit
to do the expiation consisting of the mere reciting of mantras, and go
in for the very difficult rites endangering the body and very life
itself? Says an old saying—‘If honey were available in a place within
easy reach, wherefore should one go to the hills? The desired end having
been accomplished, which wise man could put forth further efforts?’—and
again—‘What can he obtained for a single coin, no wise man purchases for
ten coins.’ Nor can the verse be taken as a valedictory supplement to
what forms the subject-matter of the context (*i.e*., Vedic Study),
because there is no ground for connecting it syntactically with the
context,—such grounds, for instance, as being found defective if taken
apart from the context and so forth.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The present verse is a direct
Injunction; and the act laid down is done for the removing of sins. It
has been argued that—“What is laid down here (being too easy) could not
be regarded as optional with those rites that are prescribed in a
different context and are very much more difficult.” But it can
certainly be taken as optional with those expiations which consist in
Mantra-recitations. For instance, the reciting of the *Mantra* has been
declared as destroying all sins; and with this what is laid down in the
present verse could be taken as optional. In connection with the
*Aghamarṣaṇa-Mantra*, three days fasting is prescribed, while according
to what is laid down in the present verse, the man becomes freed by
doing th e reciting for a month, but taking two ordinary meals every
day. Thus the difference between the two is not so great as to lead us
to regard them as very diverse in character.

Or, what is mentioned here may be taken as purifying the man from such
past sins as arc indicated by the evil position of planets, etc.; and it
is from these sins that the man becomes free. ‘*Sin*’ is something
undesirable; from this the man *becomes freed*,—*i.e*., is not affected
by the results of those sins.

‘*Just as the snake from the slough*,’—just as the snake becomes freed
from the cast-off skin. This means that the sin is completely removed.

For such past sins as are indicated by the discolouring of the skin and
such other diseases, other *Smṛtis* have prescribed many expiatory
rites. All this we shall explain under the section on Expiatory Rites.

It is in view of what, is said in the present verse that we have the
saying—‘There is no fall for people who go on reciting *mantras* and
pouring libations.’—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vahiḥ*’—Burnell represents Medhātithi as explaining this term to be
‘on a river-island and the like.’ This is not right; the word used by
Medhātithi is ‘*nadīpulinādau*’—which means ‘on the *bank* of rivers and
such places’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1220) where ‘*vahiḥ*’ is
explained as ‘outside the village’—and ‘*trikam*’ as ‘the Sāvitrī along
with the Vyāhṛtis’;—and in *Gadādharapaddhai* (Kālasāra, p. 30), which
explains ‘*trikam*’ as (1) *Praṇava*. (2) *Vyāhṛti* and (3) *Gāyatrī*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 78-79)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
2.78].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

079	A twice-born man who (daily) repeats those three one thousand times outside (the village), will be freed after a month even from great guilt, as a snake from its slough.
</details>
