+++
title = "081 ॐ-कार-पूर्विकास् तिस्रो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The three imperishable Mahāvyāhṛtis preceded by the syllable ‘oṃ,’ and the three-footed Sāvitrī,—these should be regarded as the ‘Mouth of Brahman.’—(81)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ॐकारः पूर्वो यासां ता **ॐकारपूर्विकाः** । **महाव्याहृतयः** प्रकृता एव भूर् भुवः स्वर् इत्य् एते शब्दा अभिधीयन्ते । **अव्यया** अविनाशिन्यः । फलस्य दीर्घकालत्वाद् एवम् उच्यते । अन्यथा "सर्व एव शब्दा नित्याः" इति विशेषणम् अनर्थकम् । **त्रिपदा** "तत् सवितुर्" इत्य् एषा **सावित्री ब्रह्मणो मुखम्** । आद्यत्वान् मुखव्यपदेशः अतश् चारम्भे अध्येयम् एतद् इत्य् अस्यैवार्थवादः । अथ वा **मुखं** द्वारम् उपायो ब्रह्मप्राप्तिर् अनेन भवतीत्य् एतद् एवाह ॥ २.८१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“*Preceded by the syllable Oṃ*”—in the beginning of which the syllable
‘Oṃ’ occurs.—‘*Mahāvyāhṛtis*’;—this refers to the three syllables
‘*bhūḥ*—*bhuvaḥ*—*svaḥ*,’ which form the subject-matter of the present
context.

‘*Imperishable*’;—the syllables are so called in view of the fact that
the results proceeding from their repetition are longstanding. If this
were not meant, then the qualification would be superfluous, as all
words are equally imperishable, eternal.

*Three-footed Sāvitrī*;—the verse ‘*tat savituḥ*, *etc*.’

‘*The mouth of Brahman*.’—These are called ‘mouth’ in the sense that
they form its opening. Hence this verse is to be regarded as the
valedictory supplement of the Injunction that these should be recited at
the beginning of Vedic Study.

Or ‘mouth’ may mean *portal*, the means;—the sense being that *union
with Brahman* is reached by this means. This is what is described in the
next verse.—(81)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Brahmaṇo mukham*—“Literally, the *mouth of Brahman* is meant to convey
the double sense (of *leading to*, and *leading to union with*,
*Brahman*). Both interpretations are given by Medhātithi, Kullūka. and
Rāghavānanda; while Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana explain it merely
as the *beginning or portal of the Veda*.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 71) as defining the
‘*Brahmamukha*’, which has been declared by Nārāyaṇa to be the formula
for the *Ācamana*;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 522), as laying down
the beginning of study;—in the same work again (Āhnika, p. 253), where
it is explained as meaning that the name ‘*sandhyā*’ (Twilight Prayers)
is applied to all those acts that are performed with the formula herein
specified;—also on p. 321, along with the next three verses.

This first line of this verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 1290).

The verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 50), which explains
‘*tisraḥ*’ as ‘*Bhūḥ-bhuvaḥ-svaḥ*’ and ‘*brahmaṇo mukham*’ as ‘to be
pronounced at the beginning of Vedic reading—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 135), which notes—‘*om bhūrbhuvaḥsvaḥ*’ are the three
*Vyāhṛtis*,—*tatsavituḥ* &c., is the *Sāvitrī*; all this forms the
‘*mukha*’, *i.e*. beginning, of ‘Brahman’, *i.e*. the Veda.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 81-82)  
**

*Āpastamba* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 284).—‘Seated upon kuśa, holding kuśa
and water in his hand, facing the East, one shall repeat the Gāyatrī a
thousand times, or a hundred times, or without any limit.’

*Yogi- Yājñavalkya* (Do., 283).—‘The Religious Student and the
Agnihotrin should repeat the Gāyatrī 108 times: the Hermit and the
Renunciate, more than 1,000 times,

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 286).—‘There is nothing superior to the
Gāyatrī for purposes of *Japa*; there is no penance higher than the
Gāyatrī; there is no meditation higher than the Gāyatrī; there is no
*Homa* higher than the *Viṣṇusmṛti*, 55. 15-16—\[reproduces the words of
Manu\].

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 429).—‘He who acquires the three
Vyāhṛtis preceded by the syllable *om*, and the Sāvitrī, Brahmacharya
and is called *Śrotriya*.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do.).—‘Having pronounced *om bhūrbhuvaḥsvaḥ*, he pronounces
the Sāvitrī verse beginning with *Tat savituḥ*.’

‘*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 4. 21.—‘The Brāhmaṇa who daily, at all
junctures, meditates upon this, becomes purified to Brahmaṇa and merged
in Brāhmaṇ; following the scriptures, he wins the Brahmic regions.’

*Vyāsa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 285).—‘By repeating the Gāyatrī ten times
one becomes absolved from all little sins committed during the day;
repeated a hundred times, she destroys a host of sins; repeated a
thousand times, she destroys all minor sins; by repeating it a *lakh* of
times, all the most heinous sins are destroyed; by repeating it a crore
of times, one obtains all that is desired.’

*Saṃvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 522).—‘One should utter the
*Praṇava* first: after that, the Vyāhṛtis; and then the Sāvitrī.’

*Yogi-Yāmavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 258).—‘Gāvatrī is Brahmā and
Sāvitrī is Rudra.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 321, also Parāśaramadhava, p.
284).—‘One should daily repeat the Gāyatrī, which is destructive of all
sins, a thousand times, or a hundred times, or at least ten times; the
Lord put the Gāyatrī in one pan and the Vedas along with the subsidiary
sciences in the other pan of the scale; and the two were found equal.’

*Aṅgiras* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 322)—‘One who is intent upon the
Praṇava, the seven Vyāhṛtis, and the three-footed Gāyatrī has no fear
anywhere.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 323).—‘The Praṇava, the Vyāhṛtis the
Sāvitrī verse,—these constitute the *Sāvitra*, whereby one becomes
absolved from sins; by hundred repetitions, from sins of thought; by
thousand repetitions, from sins of word; and by ten thousand
repetitions, from all sins, and has his soul perfectly pure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

081	Know that the three imperishable Mahavyahritis, preceded by the syllable Om, and (followed) by the three-footed Savitri are the portal of the Veda and the gate leading (to union with) Brahman.
</details>
