+++
title = "083 एकाक्षरम् परम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The mono-syllable is the highest Brahman; Breath-suspensions are the highest austerity; nothing is higher than the Sāvitrī verse; truth is better than Silence.—(83)


loke ca bhūtikarmasvetadīnyeca vākyāni syuryathā pupyāhaṃ svassyṛddhimiti
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ॐकार **एकाक्षरम्** । तत् **परं ब्रह्म**, ब्रह्मप्राप्तिहुत्वात् । "तज्जपस् तदर्थभावनम्[^२६७]" (य्सू १.२८) तया[^२६८] ब्रह्मप्राप्तेर् एवम् उच्यते । ओम् इति ब्रह्माभिधानम् । एवं ह्य् आहुः- "तस्य वाचकः प्रणवः" इति (य्सू १.२७) । तत्परं प्रकृष्टं कुतः । अन्याभ्यः ब्रह्मोपासनाभ्यः । "अन्नं ब्रह्मेत्य् उपासीत" (तु २.२.१), "आदित्यो ब्रह्मेत्य् आदेशः" (छु ३.१९.१) इति एवमाद्याभ्य उपासनाभ्यः ॐकारोपासना प्रकृष्यते, अध्ययनाद् एव तत्प्राप्त्यभिधानात्, शब्दस्यैव च ब्रह्मत्वेन श्रवणात् । "शब्दब्रह्मणि निष्णातः परं ब्रह्माधिगच्छति" इति (मैतु ६.२२) । सर्वो ह्य् अर्थो वाग्व्यवहारानतीतः, वाचश् च सर्वस्या ॐकारो मूलम् । तथा च श्रुतिः- "तद् यथा शंकुना सर्वाणि पत्राणि संतृण्णान्य् एवम् ॐकारेण सर्वा वाक् संतृण्णा । ॐकार एवेदं सर्वम्" इति (छु २.२३.३) । संतर्दनम् अनुसृतिः[^२६९] आश्रयभावापत्तिर् वा । कथं पुनः सर्वा वाग् ॐकारेण संतृण्णा । वैदिक्यास् तावद् ॐकारपूर्वकत्वम् उक्तम् । लौकिक्या अपि- "तदादीनि वाक्यानि स्युः" इत्य् आपस्तम्बवचनात् (आप्ध् १.१३.९) । उपनिषद्भाष्ये चैतद् अन्यथा व्याख्यातम् । तत् त्व् इहानुपयोगान् न प्रदर्शितम् । **प्राणायाम**शब्द आचमनवद् विशिष्टेतिकर्तव्यताके प्राणनिरोधे वर्तते । **परं तपः** चान्द्रायणादिभ्यः । किं पुनस् तस्य श्रैष्ठ्यम् । भक्तिर् एषा । **सावित्र्याः परं** मन्त्रज्ञानं **नास्ति** । एषाम् इति प्रशंसा । **मौनात् सत्यं विशिष्यते** । मौनं वाङ्नियम उच्यते । तस्य च[^२७०] यत् फलं ततो ऽधिकं सत्यवचनात् प्राप्यते । सत्यवचने विध्यर्थो ऽपि तथानुष्ठितो भवति । मौने तु केवलम् अनृतप्रतिषेधानुष्ठानम् एव । अर्थवादो ऽयं श्लोकः ॥ २.८३ ॥


[^२७०]:
     M G add: niyame ucyate


[^२६९]:
     M G 1st ed.: antarddhānam anusmṛtiḥ; G 2nd ed.: antarddhānam anusaṃtardanam anusmṛtiḥ


[^२६८]:
     M G: -bhāvanayā (omit tayā)


[^२६७]:
     J: bhāvanā (mine is a conjectural reading)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*monosyllable*’ is the syllable ‘*om*.’—It is the ‘*Supreme
Brahman*,’ in the sense that it is the means of reaching Brahman. This
assertion is based upon the fact that Brahman is attained by the
‘repeating,’ and ‘the meditation upon the signification,’ of the
syllable (as mentioned in *Yogasūtra* 1.28). ‘*Om*’ is a name of
Brahman; as says the *Yogasūtra* (1.23)—‘The Praṇava is expressive of
Him (God).’

“In comparison with what is this the *highest?*”

It is higher than all other forms of Brahman-meditation. The meditation
upon the syllable ‘*om*’ as Brahman is superior to all the several forms
of meditation mentioned in such texts as ‘One should meditate upon food
as Brahman’ (*Taittirīya Upaniṣad*, 2.2.1), ‘The teaching is that the
Sun is Brahman’ (*Chāndogya Upaniṣad*, 3.19.1); and this for the simple
reason that the attainment of Brahman has been described as proceeding
from the mere recitation of that syllable; and also because the word
itself has been described as ‘Brahman,’ in such passages as—‘One who is
well versed in Brahman in the form of Word attains the supreme Brahman.’
(*Maitry* *upaniṣad*, 6.22). Nothing is beyond the reach of words, and
of' all words the syllable ‘*om*’ is the very source: as says the
*Śruti*—‘Just as the needle pierces through all the leaves, so in the
same manner is all speech pierced by *om*, all this is *om* itself’
(*Chāndogya Upaniṣad*, 2.23.4). The ‘piercing’ spoken of in this passage
means ‘pervasion,’ ‘becoming the receptacle.’ “But in what manner is all
speech *pierced* by *om*?”

Well, as regards the *word* of the Veda, it has already been pointed out
(in verse 74) that its source lies in the syllable ‘*om*’ As regards the
words of secular speech, it has been declared by Āpastamba (1.4.13.9)
that ‘All sentences should be preceded by *om*.’

The above passage (from the Chāndogya) has been explained differently in
the *Upaniṣad-bhāṣya*; we are not reproducing that explanation here, as
it has no bearing on the present context.

The term ‘*breath-suspension*’ here stands for the act of suspending the
breath along with the entire procedure beginning with the sipping of
water.

‘*Highest austerity*—*i.e*., an austerity higher than the Cāndrāvaṇa and
the rest.

“What is the *superiority* here (meant by the epithet ‘*highest’)?*”

It is purely figurative.

‘*There is nothing higher than the Sāvitrī*’;—*i.e*., no other *mantra*.

In praise of all this we have the next expression—‘*Truth is better than
silence*’ ‘*Silence*’ is control of speech. And the result accruing from
the telling of truth is superior to that resulting from the control of
speech. Since the *telling of truth* implies the acting up to a positive
injunction, while in *silence* there is observance of the mere
prohibition of telling lies.

This verse is purely valedictory.—(83)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 114, 1. 12)—‘*Āpastamba vacanāt*’—This refers to
Āpastamba’s Dharmasūtra 1.4.13.9, the whole of which reads as follows—

> *loke ca bhūtikarmasvetadīnyeca vākyāni syuryathā pupyāhaṃ
> svassyṛddhimiti*

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 321), where the same
verse is attributed to Yama also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vasiṣṭha-smṛti*, 5-6.—‘The one syllable is Brahman Supreme;
Breath-suspension is the highest penance; alms-begging is superior to
fasting; and compassion is superior to charity.’

*Viṣṇu-smṛti*, 55 17—\[reproduces the words of Manu\].

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 321).—‘The syllable *om* is the highest
Brahman; Breath-suspension is the highest penance; there is nothing
superior to the Sāvitrī; Truth is superior to silence;—all Vedic acts
may dwindle away, but the syllable should be recognised as never
dwindling;—the highest Brahman in the shape of the single syllable has
been declared

to be the best purifier; there is nothing superior to the Gāyatri; Truth
is superior to silence. Daily one should repeat the Gāyatrī, 1,000 or
100 or at least 10 times, as destructive of all sins.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

083	The monosyllable (Om) is the highest Brahman, (three) suppressions of the breath are the best (form of) austerity, but nothing surpasses the Savitri truthfulness is better than silence.
</details>
