+++
title = "084 क्षरन्ति सर्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

All vedic acts of oblation and sacrifice pass away; while this syllable (om) is to be regarded as imperishable; and it is Brahman, and also Prajāpati—(84)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यावन्तः केचन वैदिका होमा अग्निहोत्रादयः, ये च यागा ज्योतिष्ठोमादयः, ते **सर्वे क्षरन्ति** न परिपूर्णा भवन्ति । फलं वा तदीयं स्रवत्य् आशु विनश्यति । **अक्षरं** त्व् एतद् ॐकाराख्यम् **अक्षरं ज्ञेयम्** अक्षयफलम् । ब्रह्मीभूतस्य न पुनः संसारापत्तिः । अतो ऽक्षयफलत्वाद् अक्षरम् उच्यते । एको ऽक्षरशब्द उद्देश्यः संज्ञाशब्दो द्वितीयो यौगिकः क्रियाशब्दः । **ब्रह्म च** तद् एव । **प्रजापतिश्** च्ॐकार **एव** । स्तुतिर् एषा । **जुहोतियजतीति** धातुनिर्देशस् तयोः **क्रिया**प्रतिपाद्यार्था यागहोमाः । व्यक्त्यपेक्षं बहुत्वम् । अथ वा धात्वर्थनिर्देश एवायं **जुहोतियजतीति** । **क्रियास्** तद्व्यतिरिक्ता दानाद्याः । द्वन्द्वश् चायम्- जुहोतियजतीति च क्रियाश् च । होमयागौ प्राधान्यात् पृथग् उपादीयेते । 

- <u>अत्रोक्ता</u>[^२७१] ॐकारस्य स्तुतिः केवलस्यापि जपविधानार्थेति केचित् । न हि प्रकृतविधिशेषतैवात्र, पुनः परामर्शाभावात् । वैश्वानरे ह्य् अष्टत्वादीनाम् "यद् अष्टाकपालो भवति, गायत्र्या चैनं ब्रह्मवर्चसेन पुनाति, यन् नवकपालस् त्रिवृतैवास्मिंस् तेजो दधाति" इति । सर्वत्र वैश्वानरपदापेक्षया तदेकवाक्यत्वे संभवति न वाक्यभेदकल्पनया विध्यन्तरसंभवः । इह त्व् **अक्षरं ज्ञेयम्** इति न पूर्वापेक्षा, नापि सावित्र्यादीनां पुनः परामर्शो ऽस्ति । अतः स्वपदार्थैर् एव वाक्यार्थपरिसमाप्तेर् नान्यशेषता । **ज्ञेयम्** इत्य् अत्र कृत्वो विधायकः । ब्रह्मपदेन च संबन्धाद् ब्रह्मरूपतया ज्ञेयम् उपास्यं भावनीयम् । भाव्यमाने च तस्मिन् मानसजप उक्तो भवति ॥ २.८४ ॥


[^२७१]:
     M G 1st ed.: atha yuktā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

All acts laid down in the Veda—‘*oblations*’ in the form of *Agnihotra*
and the rest,—as also ‘*sacrifices*’ in the form of *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the
rest,—‘*pass away’; i.e*., either they never bring about their results
in their entirety, or even when brought about, those results perish
quickly.

‘*This syllable*’—‘*om*’—is to be known as ‘*imperishable*,’ *i.e*.,
bringing about imperishable results; since for one who has become merged
into Brahman, there is no return to worldly existence. Thus leading to
an imperishable result, the syllable is itself called ‘imperishable.’
One of the two terms ‘*akṣara*,’ one is a noun, which forms the subject
of the sentence, while the other, is the predicate, and is taken in its
literal sense.

That same syllable is also Brahman, and Prajāpati.

This also is purely valedictory.

The expression ‘*juhoti-yajati*’ mentions two verbal roots; and the term
‘*kriyā*’ stands for the actions of (oblation) and *Yāga* (sacrifice)—as
denoted by the two roots. The plural number is due to the multiplicity
of the acts. Or, the two verbal roots may be taken as standing for the
acts of *Homa* and *Yāga* themselves, while ' *kriyā*’ stands for the
other acts of charity and the like. The whole is a copulative
compound—made up of the three terms ‘*juhoti*,’ and ‘*kriyā*’—the acts
of *H* *oma* and *Yāga* being separately mentioned by reason of their
importance.

Some people have held that this praise of the syllable ‘*om*’ by itself
(as apart from the and the verse) is meant to enjoin the repetition of
the syllable; and they argue that this cannot be taken as merely
supplementary to the foregoing injunction of the reciting of the Sāvitrî
along with ‘*om*,’ etc., as no reference to this latter is made in the
present verse; as there is in the case of the sacrifice, in connection
with which we find two passages—(*a*) ‘*Yadaṣṭākapalo bhavati gāyat
chainam brahmavarchasena punāti*,’ and (*b*)
‘*Yannavakapalastṛvṝtaivāsmimstejo* *daḍhāii*,’—where reference is
distinctly made to a foregoing injunction; so that so long as it is
found possible (on the basis of this reference) to connect the
injunctions syntactically (and treat them as a single injunction), there
can be no justification for splitting them up into two distinct
injunctions. In the present instance, on the other hand, when it is said
that ‘*this should be regarded as imperishable*,’ there is no reference
to any thing that has gone before; nor is there any reference made to
the *Sāvitrī*, etc. Por these reasons, the present text is to be taken
as a self-contained injunction, and not as supplementary to something
else. Further, the verbal affix in ‘*jñeyaḥ*’ ‘(should be regarded)’ is
purely injunctive. And this, taken along with the word ‘*brahma*,’ gives
the sense that ‘this should he regarded—*i.e*., meditated upon—as
Brahman’; and this ‘*meditation*’ stands for the mental process of
repeating the syllable.—(84)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṣaranti*’—‘Pass away—do not bring about their complete results, or
their results disappear quickly’—(Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘Perish—as far as their form and results are
concerned’—(Nandana).

‘*Brahma*’—The neuter form is accepted by Medhātithi, Govindarāja,
Kullūka and Rāghavānanda. Nārāyaṇa and Nandana read the masculine form
‘*brahmā*’, and explain the phrase as ‘just like Brahmā, the Prajāpati.’

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Ācāra, p. 321), where it is
explained that—‘*akṣaram*’ stands for the *syllable* ‘*om*’,—and this is
‘akṣara’ in the sense that its effect in the form Final Release ‘never
perishes’ (*na-kṣarati*);—and that the syllable ‘*om*’ is to be regarded
as ‘Prajāpati’ on the ground of its being expressive of that deity. Here
again this same verse is attributed to Yama also.

Medhātithi’s remarks on p. 115,11. 1-8 are based upon Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra 1.
4. 17-22.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā, p. 79), which reads
‘*Akṣaram śreṣṭham*’ for ‘*duṣkaram jñeyam*’ and explains it as
‘*Brahma-praṇava*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-smṛti*, 55.18—\[reproduces Manu\].

*Vasiṣṭhasmṛti*, 25.11.—‘The one syllable winch is the highest Brahman,
lias been declared to be the best purifier.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 7. 2. 13.—‘One should equip himself with the
syllable.’

*Yama* \[see preceding verse\].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

084	All rites ordained in the Veda, burnt oblations and (other) sacrifices, pass away; but know that the syllable (Om) is imperishable, and (it is) Brahman, (and) the Lord of creatures (Pragapati).
</details>
