+++
title = "085 विधियज्ञाज् जपयज्ञो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The offering that consists in the repeating of mantras excels the enjoined (ritualistic) offering ten times; the inaudible (repeating) excels this latter a hundred times; and the Mental (repeating) excels it a thousandfold.—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विधिविषयो यज्ञो **विधियज्ञो** ज्योतिष्टोमादिः । यत् कर्म यजेतेति चोदितम्, बाह्येन[^२७२] व्यापारेण ऋत्विगादिसर्वाङ्गसंपत्त्या क्रियते स विधियज्ञ इहोच्यते । जपस् तु न यज्ञः । प्रशंसया यज्ञ उपचारेणोच्यते । अतो नासौ विधियज्ञः । स **विशिष्टः** प्रकृष्टः श्रेष्ठो यज्ञो ज्योतिष्टोमादेर् **दशभिर् गुणैः** । महाफलत्वम् एतेन जपस्योच्यते । यद् एव यागात् फलं तद् एव बहुतरं जपात्[^२७३] पाप्यते । न च यागेभ्यः श्रौतेभ्यो जपस्याधिकफलत्वं युक्तम् । तथा हि सति कः शरीरधनपरिक्षयरूपेषु यागेष्व् अध्यवस्येत् । तस्मात् प्रशंसैषा । पूर्णाहुत्या सर्वान् कामान् अवाप्नोतीतिवत् । एतावद् अस्यार्थः, तद् एव स्वर्गादिफलम् अवाप्यते, किं तु लोकवत् प्रयत्नविशेषात् । फलपरिमाणविशेषो ऽविशेषित्वात् यज्ञस्य, स्वर्गग्रामपुत्रपश्वादि यस्य यज्ञस्य यत् फलं तत् तज्जपात् प्राप्यते । **उपांशुः शतगुणः,** यद् अन्यो न शृणोति समीपस्थो ऽपि । सहस्र गुणः **साहस्रो मानसः** मनोव्यापारमात्रेण[^२७४] यश् चिन्त्यते । जपमात्रविषय उपांशुत्वादिगुणः, प्रकृतस्य यो ऽधीतेत्य् अनेन विच्छेदात्, तेन य प्रायश्चित्तादौ जपो यः शान्तिको यश् चाभ्युदयिकः सर्वत्रैते गुणाः । सहस्रम् अस्यास्तीति **साहस्रः** । गुणानां प्रकृतत्वात् सहस्रगुणसद्भावः प्रतीयते । गुणशब्दश् चावयववचनः । फलभूमा च संबन्धाद् अवगम्यते ॥ २.८५ ॥


[^२७४]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: mano


[^२७३]:
     M G: bahutarajapāt


[^२७२]:
     M G: brāhmaṇa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*enjoined offering*’ is that which forms the subject of
injunctions; such as *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest; such acts are called
‘enjoined offering,’ as they have been enjoined by words like ‘should
offer’ and the rest, and are performed by means of external acts, and
with the full accompaniment of priests and other innumerable details.

The *Japa*, ‘ Repeating of Mantras’ is not an ‘offering’; but with a
view to eulogise it, it has been spoken as an ‘offering’ only
figuratively; consequently this cannot be included under the term
‘enjoined offering.’

This latter ‘*excels*,’—is a better, superior, offering than the
*Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest,—‘*ten times*’.

What is meant here is that the Repeating of Mantras is highly
efficacious; the meaning being that the results proceeding from the
Repetition are the same, but larger, as those proceeding from the
Ritualistic Offerings. It is not meant that the Repeating of Mantras
actually brings about results larger than those brought about by the
ritualistic sacrifices; for if it were really so, who ‘would ever
undertake the performance of the latter, which involve much physical
hardship and the expenditure of much wealth? For these reasons it is
clear that what is said here is a mere praise (of the Repeating of
Mantras); just like the assertion that ‘One attains all desirable ends
by the

Final Oblation.’ All that is meant is that from this act also the same
results follow, in the shape of Heaven and the rest; but the difference
iu the amount of human effort involved leads to the difference in the
degree of the result. And as the text does not specify any particular
result, it should be taken to mean that by the Repeating of Mantras one
obtains the same results—in the shape of heaven, landed property,
children and cattle—as those proceeding from sacrificial performances.

‘*The Inaudible, a hundred times*’—That repeating of Mantras is called
Inaudible which is not heard by any other person, however near he may
be.

‘*A thousand times—the Mental*.’—That in which the Mantra in meditated
upon by a mere mental operation.

The ‘Inaudible’ and other qualifications pertain to all kinds of
Repeating Mantras (and not only to the repeating of the *Gāyatrī*,
etc.); the continuity of the context, starting from verse 82, having
been broken. Hence, whenever there is repetition of Mantras—in the
course of either Expiatory Rites, or the rites performed for the
allaying of portents, or those intended to bring about prosperity,—the
said qualifications become applicable.

The term ‘*sāhasra*’ literally means *that which has a thousand*; and
since the noun spoken of is ‘*guṇa*,’ ‘times,’ ‘fold,’ the term means
‘thousand-fold’; the term ‘fold’ standing for *part*. That this refers
to the *excess of results* is clear from the connection of the entire
sentence.—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (P. 115,1. 16)—‘*Pūrṇahutyā &c*.’—See in this connection
*Sāyaṇa-Ṛgvedhbhāṣya*—Upodghāta (Introduction).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-smṛti*, 55.19.—\[reproduces Manu’s words.\]

*Vasiṣṭha-smṛti*, 26.10—\[the same as Manu, with the exception that for
‘*vidhi*’ it reads ‘*ārambha*’\].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

085	An offering, consisting of muttered prayers, is ten times more efficacious than a sacrifice performed according to the rules (of the Veda); a (prayer) which is inaudible (to others) surpasses it a hundred times, and the mental (recitation of sacred texts) a thousand times.
</details>
