+++
title = "096 न तथैतानि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

These (organs), being contaminated with objects, are not capable of being subjugated by mere abstinence, as they are by ever present knowledge.—(90)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२९०]:
     M G J all read: prajuṣṭāni; but Medh's commentary clearly presupposes praduṣṭāni

यद्य् एवम् अरण्यवास एव तर्हि प्राप्ते,[^२९१] न हि तत्र विषया संनिधीयन्ते । असंनिहिताश् च न सेविष्यन्ते । तदर्थम् आह- नासेवया इन्द्रियाणि नियन्तव्यानीति । निःसुखः स्यात् । अथ च स्मरन्ति- "न[^२९२] पूर्वाह्णमधंदिनापराह्णान् अफलान् कुर्याद् यथाशक्तिधर्मार्थकामेभ्यः" (ग्ध् ९.४६) । न च शरीरधारणम् असेवया भवति । किं तु गर्द्धनिषेधो ऽयम् उच्यते । स च गर्द्धः सत्याम् अपि सेवयां[^२९३] **ज्ञानेन** विषयगतदोषज्ञानेन "अस्थिस्थूणं स्नायुयुतम्"[^२९४] (म्ध् ६.७६) इत्यादिशास्त्रोक्तेन, स्वसंविदा च विपाकविरसतया । किं विपाकफलम् एवादिदोषभावनया वैराग्याभ्यासेन[^२९५] क्रमेण स्पृहा निवर्तते । न तु सहसैव त्यक्तुं शक्यते । किं तु **नित्यशः** नित्यकालम् । ज्ञानविशेषणम् एतत् । **प्रदुष्टानि** प्रवृत्तानि । दोषत्वात् प्रवृत्तान्य् एव प्रदुष्टान्य्[^२९६] उच्यन्ते[^२९७] । अयं शस्[^२९८] तत्र तत्र, नित्यशः अनुपूर्वशः सर्वशः पूर्वश इति, व्यासमनुप्रभृतिभिर् महामुनिभिः प्रयुज्यते । तस्य साधुत्वे यत्नः कर्तव्यः । तत्र शस्विधौ "एकवचनाच् च वीप्सायाम्" (पाण् ५.४.४३) इति पठ्यते । तत्र वीप्सार्थः कथंचित् द्योतयितव्यः । अन्ये तु शसस् तिष्ठत्यर्थस्य क्विपि रूपं वर्णयन्ति । क्रियाविशेषणं चैतत् नपुंसकम् । नित्यस्थितेन ज्ञानेनेत्य् अर्थः ॥ २.९६ ॥


[^२९८]:
     M G: ayam aṃśas


[^२९७]:
     M G: ucyate


[^२९६]:
     M G: praduṣṭāny eva pravṛttāny


[^२९५]:
     G 2nd ed. adds: satāpi


[^२९४]:
     M G: asthisthūṇāsnāyuyutam


[^२९३]:
     M G 1st ed.: satyāpi sevayā


[^२९२]:
     The readings here are quite confused. I follow Jha. M G 1st ed.: tadartham āha: na sevayā indriyāṇi niyantavyānīti | athocyate | niḥsukhaḥ syād iti hi smaranti | asaṃnihitāś ca na seviṣyante | tadartham āha | nāsevayā indriyāṇi niyantavyānīti; G 2nd ed.: tadartham āha: nāsevayā indriyāṇi niyantavyānīti | athocyate | niḥsukhaḥ syād iti hi smaranti |


[^२९१]:
     J: prāptam |
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“Well, if this is so, then the right course, would appear to be that one
should retire to the forest; as there will be no objects within reach;
and being beyond reach, they would naturally never be sought
after.”—With a view to such notions, the text adds that the organs
should not be subjugated by mere abstinence; as in that case the man
would have no pleasures at all, while the *Smṛti* has distinctly
declared that—‘Acquiring merit, wealth and pleasures, one should see
that his mornings, mid-days and evenings are not useless’ (*Gautama*,
9.46); and further, the continuance of the body itself would become
impossible, by total abstinence. What therefore is meant is to prohibit
excessive longing; and even though one may enjoy pleasures, this
excessive longing ceases under the influence—(*a*) of ‘*knowledge*,’ of
defects in the objects, as described in the scriptures, such for
instance as in 6.76 below,—(*b*) of one’s own experience, whereby the
said pleasures are found to be unpleasant in their consequences,—and
(*c*) of the constant and gradual practice of nonattachment arising from
the due examination of the effects of the pleasures. It is not possible
for the said longing to be renounced all at once..

‘*Ever present*’;—this qualifles ‘*knowledge*.’

‘*Contaminated*’—active, since objects are beset with defects, the
addiction to them is called ‘contamination.’

The ‘*śas*’ used here is one that is frequently used by Vyāsa, Manu and
other great sages,—in such expressions as‘*nityaśaḥ*,’ ‘*anupūrvaśaḥ*,’
‘*sarvaśaḥ*,’ ‘*pūrvaśaḥ*,’ and so forth. But exceptional efforts have
to be made in order to establish the correctness of such usage. And in
as much as the rule regarding the use of the affix ‘*śas*’ as laid down
in *Pāṇini* 5. 4. 43, is that *it is added to singular nouns, in the
sense of repetition*,—it is necessary to make the words in question
imply, somohow or other, the notion of *repetition*. Other people have
explained the expression ‘ś *as*’ as a noun formed from the root ‘*ś*
*as*’ to stand, with the affix ‘*kvip*’; and the word thus formed would
be neuter and would be treated as an adverb, the meaning being—‘*by
knowledge which is ever-standing*.’—(96)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Asevayā*”—‘avoidance of excessive longing for pleasures’—(Medhātithi);
‘avoidance of places where pleasures are to be obtained’
(Kullūka);—‘abstinence from pleasures’ (Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and
Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Bālambhaṭṭi* (Vyāvahāra, p. 606).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śaṅkha-smṛti* (7. 10-11).—‘That man the Gods regard as a Brāhmaṇa, who
is disgusted with birth, with death and with mental and physical
ailments. The impurity of the body, the reversal of pleasure and pain,
residence in the womb,—from all this one becomes freed.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

096	Those (organs) which are strongly attached to sensual pleasures, cannot so effectually be restrained by abstinence (from enjoyments) as by a constant (pursuit of true) knowledge.
</details>
