+++
title = "101 पूर्वां सन्ध्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Everyday during the earlier twilight one should stand repeating the Sāvitrī, till the sun becomes distinctly visible; and during the later twilight he should sit till the stars ark clearly seen.—(101)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

संमुखे प्रातः **पूर्वा संध्या** । आदित्यास्तमये **पश्चिमा** । तां **तिष्ठेत् जपन् सावित्रीम्** । आसनाद् उत्थाय निवृत्तगतिर् एकत्र देशे स्यात् । सावित्री उक्तैव "तत् सवितुर् वरेण्यम्" इति । तस्या ह्य् अनुवादाः । ॐकारादिविधिः श्लोके संध्याजपार्थम् "एतद् अक्षरम् एतां च" इति (म्ध् २.७८) । **आर्कदर्शनाद्** इति । यावद् भगवान् आदित्यो दृष्टः । जपस्थानयोर् अयम् एव विनिर्देशः ।

- <u>ननु</u> किम्[^३०७] विधिना, अर्कोदय एव संध्या निवर्तते । तथा हि, न सर्वं तमः क्षीणं नापि परिपूर्णः प्रकाश एषा संध्या । उक्तं च- 


[^३०७]:
     G 1st ed. adds: atra

- दिवि प्रकाशो भुवि चान्धकारः कालः स सावित्र इति प्रदिष्टः ।

निरुक्ते ऽप्य् उक्तम्- "अधोभागः[^३०८] सावित्रः इति पशुसमाम्नाये विज्ञायते । कस्मात् सामान्याद् अधस्ताद् रामो ऽधस्तात् कृष्णः" इति (निर् १२.१३) । आदित्योदये च सर्वतस् तमो निवर्तते । उभयधर्मानिवृत्तौ च संध्या- रात्रिधर्मे ऽहर्धर्मे च । अत्यन्तसंयोगे चैषा द्वितीया **संध्याम्** इति । तेन यावत् संध्याकालं तिष्ठेद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । ततः परं स्वातन्त्र्यं स्थितम् एव । 


[^३०८]:
     The editions of the Nirukta read: adhorāmaḥ.

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुर् नैवेयम् अत्यन्तसंयोगे द्वितीया । किं तर्हि "कालश् चाकर्मकाणां कर्मसंज्ञो भवति" इति[^३०९] वार्तिककारस् तत्र "कर्मणि द्वितीया" (पाण् २.३.२) इत्य् एव द्वितीया । यत् तु "कालाध्वनोर् अत्यन्तसंयोगे" (पाण् २.३.५) इति तद् यत्र क्रियावाची शब्दो न प्रयुज्यते । क्रोशं कुटिला नदी, सर्वरात्रं कल्याणी । यत्र[^३१०] च सकर्मको धातुः- मासम् अधीयत इति[^३११] तस्य विषयः । इह पुनः संध्यां तिष्ठेद् इति तिष्ठतिर् अकर्मकः । अतो विधिनिर्देशः कृत्स्नसंध्याप्राप्त्यर्थं स्थानासनयोः कर्तुम्[^३१२] । आरम्भकालस् त्व् इह नोक्तः, संध्याशब्देनैव समर्पितत्वात् । य एव हि संध्याकालस्यारम्भः स एव तद्विधेः[^३१३] । न हि पूर्णमास्यादिकालवद् दीर्घः संध्याकालः, यदि विलम्बः स्याद् दुर्लक्षो ह्य् असाव् अतिसूक्ष्मत्वात् तुलान्तरयोर् इव नामोन्नासौ । अलक्ष्यपौर्वापर्यौ रात्रेर् विरामो ऽह्नश् च प्रारम्भः[^३१४] । अतिशीघ्रगतिर् भगवान् भास्करस् तस्य यथा निर्भुक्ते राशौ राश्यन्तरसंक्रमणं[^३१५] त्रुटिमात्रकालम् इच्छन्ति ज्यौतिषिकाः । एवं देवसारम्भावसानयोर् अप्य् उदयास्तमयौ । प्रागुदयाद् रात्रिर् उदिते ऽहः । अनेन च नास्ति संध्या, आदित्योदयेनैव रात्रिविरामात् । अत एवोदयास्तमयसमीपयोर् अनुष्ठानप्रवृत्तिः । स्पष्टे च सूर्ये नक्षत्रेषु च निवृत्तिर् यतो य इयन्तं कालम् उपास्ते तेनावश्यं मुख्ये काले विधिर् निर्वर्तितो भवति । अत एव च यावान् सावित्रः कालः सेह संध्याभिप्रेता न ज्योतिःशास्त्रगणिता । सा चोक्ता पुरस्तात् ।


[^३१५]:
     M G 1st ed. add: tu


[^३१४]:
     M G 1st ed. here read: -āparyāv adhinivāso 'hnaś ca


[^३१३]:
     M G add: śrotriyasyāpi


[^३१२]:
     M G: kartavyaḥ


[^३११]:
     M G 1st ed. add: satyaṃ


[^३१०]:
     M G 1st ed.: ubhayatra


[^३०९]:
     This is not an exact citation of Kātyāyana's _Vārttika _(on Pāṇ 1.4.51; in Patañjali, _Mahābhāṣya _I: 336) where it reads: kālabhāvādhvagantavyāḥ karmasaṃjñā hy akarmaṇām.

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं येषाम् अयम् एवाग्निहोत्रकालस् तेषां संध्याविधेर् अभावः प्रसक्तः । 

- <u>केयं</u> परिनोदना । श्रौतेन स्मार्तस्य बाधो युक्त एव ।[^३१६] नैव चात्र विरोधः । तिष्ठतापि शक्यं होतुम् आसीनेन च । 


[^३१६]:
     M G add: gṛhyāgnihomena vikalpitam

- <u>ननु</u> च न केवले स्थानासने संध्ययोर् विहिते, किं तु त्रिकजपो ऽपि । तच् च सावित्रीं जपन् कथं होममन्त्रम् उच्चारयेत् । 

- <u>अस्तु</u> जपस्य बाधः । प्रधाने तावत् स्थानासने न विरुध्येते । "गुणलोपे च मुख्यस्य" (प्म्स् १०.२.६२) इत्य् अनेन न्यायेन जपस्याङ्गत्वाद् बाधो युक्तः । तयोश् च प्रधानत्वं साक्षाद् विधिसंबन्धात् तिष्ठेद् आसीतेति[^३१७] च । जपस्य तु गुणत्वम्, शत्रन्तत्वाज् जपतेर् लक्षणत्वावगमात् । अधिकारसंबन्धश् च स्थानासनयोर् एव, "न तिष्ठति तु यः पूर्वाम्" तथा "तिष्ठन् नैशम् एनो व्यपोहति" इति (म्ध् १.१०३, १०२ ) ।


[^३१७]:
     M G: āsīta veti

- <u>यत् तु</u> केनचिद् उक्तम्- तिष्ठतिर् अत्र गुणः, प्रधानं जपकर्म । ततो हि फलम् अश्रौष्मेति । <u>तत्रोच्यते</u> । नैवायं कामिनो ऽधिकारः । कुतः फलश्रवणम् । यत् तु प्रणवादिवाक्ये "वेदपुण्येन युज्यते" (म्ध् २.७८) इति फलानुवादभ्रमः, स तत्रैव निर्णीतः । तस्मात् स्थानासने प्रधाने ।

- <u>अथ वा</u> अग्निहोत्रिणः सकृत् सावित्रीं जपिष्यन्ति त्रिर् आवर्तयिष्यन्ति वा । न तावताग्निहोत्रस्य कालातिपत्तिः । अश्नन् सायं विनिर्मुक्त इति न तावता विहन्यते । अश्नशब्दः चिरकालवचनः । तावता च कृतः संध्यार्थो भवति । अर्कदर्शनपर्यन्तता ह्य् अङ्गम् एव । उदितहोमिनां कृतसंध्यानाम् एवाग्निहोत्रहोमः । 

- गौतमेन तु "सज्योतिष्या ज्योतिषो दर्शनात्" इति (ग्ध् २.११) सूत्रस्यार्थः । एतावान् कालः संध्योच्यते । न विध्यङ्गम् । तत्रैतावति काले नास्त्य् आवृत्तिः । यथा "पौर्णमास्यां यजेत" (श्ब् ११.१.३.६) इति न कालानुरोधेन कर्मण आवृत्तिः, तथा पूर्वां संध्यां सनक्षत्रां पश्चिमां सदिवाकराम् इति, तद् अपि काललक्षणम् एतावान् काल इह संध्याशब्देनोच्यते । तत्र सांध्यो विधिर् अनुष्ठेयः । तत्रेयति संध्याशब्दवाच्ये काले च मुहूर्तमात्रे यदि त्रिचतुरासु कालकलासु स्थानासनजपान् कुर्यात्, संपन्न एव विध्यर्थः । न ह्य् अत्र कृत्स्नकालव्याप्तिः श्रुता[^३१८] मनोर् इव । सर्वथाग्निहोत्रसंध्याविधी समानकालाव् अपि शक्याव् अनुष्ठातुम् ।


[^३१८]:
     M G: śrutau

- **सदा**शब्दो नित्यताम् आह । उभयसंध्याशेषः । **आसीत** आसनम् अनूर्ध्वतावस्थानम् उपविष्टो भवेत् । **ऋक्षं** नक्षत्रम् । **आ** तद्**विभावनात्** । **आर्कदर्शनाद्** इति य आकारः स इहानुषक्तव्यः । **सम्यक्**शब्दो दर्शनविभावनयोर् विशेषणम् । सम्यग् यदा परिपूर्णमण्डल आदित्यो भवति, नक्षत्राणि च भास्वन्ति स्वभासा युक्तानि नादित्यतेजोऽभिभूतानि ॥ २.१०१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Earlier twilight*’ is that when the morning is ahead; and the ‘later
twilight’ is that when the sun sets. During the former ‘*one should
stand, repeating the Sāvitrī*; *i.e*., rising from the seat, one should
desist from moving and continue to remain at the same place. The
‘*Sāvitrī*’ has already been described as the verse ‘*tatsavitur
varenyam*’; and it is this verse that has been referred to in the verse
2.78 laying down the pronouncing of the syllable ‘*om*,’ etc., in
connection with the reciting of the Twilight Prayers.

‘*Till the sun is visible*’—till the blessed God Sun becomes seen.

The present verse contains the injunction of the *Repeating* (of the
*Sāvitrī*) and the *Standing*.

*Question*:—“What is the use of laying down the limit? The ‘twilight’
naturally ceases at sun-rise. For the very definition of ‘Twilight’ is
that ‘it is that time during which darkness is not all gone, nor is
light quite complete.’ It is also thus described—‘When there is
brightness in the sky and darkness on the earth, this time has been
called sacred to the Sun.’ In the *Nirukta* also it is said that ‘When
there is ruddiness below, it is the *Sāvitra* time.’ In works dealing
with animals also it is said—‘From what similarity—because it is ruddy
underneath, and black underneath.’ And as a matter of fact, darkness
ceases entirely at sunrise. It is ‘twilight’ when the characteristics of
neither day nor night have ceased. The Accusative ending in ‘*Sandyām*’
denotes *duration*; hence the meaning is that so long as the time of
twilight continues he should remain standing; and after that the man is
naturally free.”

In answer to this some people have held that the Accusative ending here
does not denote *duration*, it denotes the *objective* itself, in
accordance with the declaration of the author of the *Vārtika* that
‘time conies to be called the object of intransitive verbs.’ As regards
Pāṇini’s rule (2.3.5) laying down the use of the Accusative in the sense
of ‘duration of time and space,’ it refers either to (1) such sentences
as do not contain a verb signifying some action,—*e.g*., ‘the river
crooked *for two miles* (*krośam*),’ ‘blessed *throughout the night*
(*sarva-* *rātram*),’—or (2) where the verb used is a transitive
one,—*e.g*., ‘the book is studied *for a month* (*māsam*).’ In the
present instance however, in the sentence ‘*pūrvām sandhyām
tiṣṭhet*,’—the root ‘*sthū*’ is intransitive. Hence the injunction in
the text must be taken as meant to imply simply that the acts of
*standing* and *sitting* should be done during the two Twilights. The
precise time for the beginning of the acts is not directly laid down;
for the simple reason that it is already implied: the time for the
beginning of the enjoined act is the same as that of the period of
‘twilight.’ This period of ‘twilight’ is not a lengthy one, like that of
the ‘Full Moon Day’ and the like; so that if there were any delay (in
the beginning), the time would be difficult to detect; because the time
falling between the end of night and the beginning of day is extremely
subtle, and the sequence between these two is as difficult to discern as
that between the rising of one and the dipping of another pan of the
weighing scale. The Sun-god is extremely swift in his movements; and the
time intervening between his passing from one zodiacal sign and entering
into another has been regarded by astronomers to be a mere ‘truṭi,’
infinitesimal Similarly with the rising and setting of the Sun as
indicating the beginning and end of the day. Before sun-rise it is
‘Night,’ and after sun-rise it is ‘Day’; and under this explanation
there is no such time as ‘Twilight’; the rising of the sun h aving put
an end to the night. It is for this reason that the performance is begun
at times approximating to sunrise and sunset; and it ceases as soon as
either the sun or the stars become distinctly visible. And hence one who
continues the performance during such time is regarded as having
fulfilled the injunction at the proper time. Thus what is meant by
‘Twilight’ here is just that time which is ‘*Sāvitra*’—pertaining to the
Sun,—and not that infinitesimal point of time postulated in astronomical
works, which has been referred to above.

*Objection*.—“If this is so, then the offering of Twilight Prayers
becomes impossible for those for whom the said time is exactly at which
they perform their *Agnihotra*.”

*Answer*.—What is this objection? In the first place it is only right
that what is enjoined in the *Smṛti* (*i.e*., the Twilight Prayers)
should be set aside by what is enjoined in the *Śruti* (*i.e., the
Agnihotra*). But as a matter of fact, there is no incompatibility
between the two acts; for the Agnihotra-oblations (laid down by *Śruti*)
could very well be offered by one while he is *standing* or *sitting*
(which two acts are enjoined by the present verse).

“But it is not only *standing* and *sitting* that are enjoined by the
present text; the repeating of the threefold Mantra is also prescribed.
So that while one is repeating the (according to the present verse), how
could he, at the same time, recite the Mantras prescribed in connection
with the *Agnihotra* - oblations?”

Well, in that case, the repeating (of the *Sāvitrī*, etc.) might be set
aside; but there would be no such incompatibility in connection with the
acts of *standing* and *sitting*, which are the principal factors in the
present injunction. And in accordance with the principle enunciated in
Jaimini’s *Sūtra* (10. 2. 63), it is only right that the act of
*repeating the Sāvitrī*,—which is only a subordinate factor—should be
set aside. That the acts of *standing* and *sitting* are the principal
factors is shown by the fact that the injunctive words ‘*tiṣṭhet*,
(should stand) ‘*āsīta*’ (‘should sit’) directly enjoin those acts only;
and that the *repeating* of the *Sāvitrī* is the subordinate factor is
shown by the fact that it is spoken of by means of the present
participial epithet (‘*japan*,’ ‘repeating’), which shows that it is
only a qualifying adjunct. And the real connection with the injunction
is of the acts of *standing* and *sitting* only; as is also made clear
by what follows in the next two verses.

Some people have held that in the present context *standing* is the
subordinate and the act of *repeating* the predominant factor, as it is
from the latter that we have read of results following (in verse 78).

In answer to this we make the following observations: The present
context is not intended for persons moved by personal desires; hence why
should the text speak of any desirable results? As regards the
misconception that people h ave regarding the declaration in verse
78—‘He becomes endowed with Vedic merit’—describing the syllable ‘*om*,’
etc., as being a description of results,—this we have already disposed
of under that context. Hence we conclude that in the present context,
*standing* and *sitting* are the predominant factors.

Or, it may be that those who perforin the *Agnihotra* shall recite the
*Sāvitrī* only once, or shall repeat it thrice; and this much of it will
not interfere with the time prescribed for the *Agnihotra*. \[Just as
even though it is stated that ‘in the evening one becomes free by
muttering prayers for a long time,’ yet this does not interfere with the
performance of the *Agnihotra*. The term ‘*aśna*’ stands for *long
time.\]* And yet the said recitation of the *Sāvitrī* would accomplish
the purpose of the Twilight Prayers; specially as the assertion that the
repeating is to go on *till the sun is seen* is only a subordinate
factor in the Injunction (and hence need not be necessarily followed).

\[The above applies to such *Agnihotrins* only as have adopted the time
before sun-rise for their offerings.\] As for those who have adopted the
time *after sunrise*, (the difficulty does not arise, and) the
Agnihotra-oblations would naturally be offered after the Twilight
Prayers have been offered.

Gautama (2.17) speaks of the two Twilight Prayers as to be offered
‘(*a*) while the stars are still visible (at dawn) and (*b*) till such
time as the stars become visible (after sunset)’; and all that this
means is that the time described is to be regarded as ‘Twilight’; and it
does not mean that this time mentioned is part of the Injunction; nor
does it follow that the *Sāvitrī* is to be repeated during the whole of
the time stated. Just as in the case of the Injunction ‘One should offer
sacrifices on the full-moonday,’ it does not mean that the act of
sacrificing is to be repeated during all the time comprised in the time
mentioned; exactly in the same manner, when we have such assertions as
that “the Earlier Twilight-Prayers are to be repeated while the stars
are visible, and the later ones while the sun is still visible,”—all
that is meant is the definition of the two times; the meaning being that
‘such and such a time is what is meant by the term *Twilight*; and it is
at that time that the Twilight-Prayers should be offered.’ Thus then,
the term ‘Twilight’ standing for the period of time mentioned, if one
should perform the *standing* or *sitting* and *mantra-ref tenting* for
only a minute, or for any three or four points of time, he will have
accomplished what is prescribed by the Injunction.

The term ‘*Sadā*,’ ‘*Every day,'* signifies the compulsory character of
the act; and it is to be taken as pertaining to both *Twilights*.

‘*Should sit*’;—‘*sitting*’ standing for any position other than
*standing*, the meaning is that he should be seated.

‘*Ṛkṣa*’ means *stars*. ‘*Ā*’—*i.e*., *till*—they are seen;—the ‘*ā*’
(‘till’) occurring in connection with ‘*arkadarśanāt*’ (in the first
time) should be construed also along with ‘*ṛkṣavibhāvanāt*.’

‘*Samyak*,’ ‘*clearly*,’ qualifies both ‘*darśana*’ and ‘*vibhāvana*’;
the sense being—(*a*) ‘when the sun is seen *clearly*,—*i.e*., the whole
disc becomes visible,’—and (*b*) ‘when the stars are bright, shining in
their full splendour, and not dimmed by the stronger light of the
sun.’—(101)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 121, 1. 26)—‘*Gautamena tu*.’ The complete Sutra of
Gautama is as follows tiṣṭhet pūrvāmāsīta uttarāṃ sajyotiṣyājyotiṣo
darśanāt vāgyataḥ (2. 17)

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 447);—also in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 281) as laying down the necessity of
*japa*;—and in *Hemādri* (Śirāddha, p. 695).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 267).—‘The junction of Day and Night,
devoid of the Sun, and the Stars, is called the *Twilight*.’

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 269).—‘Two *nādis* at the end of night is
the beginning of the Twilight; and the appearance of the first streak of
the sun is its end.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 17.—‘The morning prayers should be offered
while the stars are still visible, and the Evening Prayers, before the
stars become visible,—the man being seated and speech held in check.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, (4.2. 10,12,13).—‘The Morning Prayers should
be offered by one seated facing the East;—it may be begun before
sunrise, but it should be completed as soon as the sun has risen the
Evening Prayers should he begun before sunset; it may be completed later
on.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.11.30. 8).—‘The two Twilight Prayers should
be offered outside the village, with speeoh controlled.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-smṛti* (26. 2-3).—‘Whatever sins, in act, mind Or speech, may
have been committed during the day,—the man casts off by means of
Breath-suspensions during the performance of the Evening
Prayers;—whatever sins...... during the day... Morning Prayers.’

*Viṣṇu-smṛti* (27. 2-3).—‘Prayers during the two twilights;—the Morning
one should he offered standing, and the Evening one, sitting.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 24-25).—‘One should continue to repeat the Sāvitrī in
the evening till the appearance of the stars; and in the morning till
the appearance of the sun.’

*Samvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 447).—‘In the morning the
Twilight Prayers should be offered while the stars are still visible;
the Evening Prayers while the sun is still visible, being only half-set;
the student should offer the morning prayers, standing, and the evening
prayers, seated.

*Vyāsa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—Since they worship the Twilight at
the time of the junction of day and night, they call it the *Twilight
Prayer*.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—‘One should offer the
Twilight Prayers at the junction, not either after sunset or after
sunrise.’

*Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—‘Meditating upon the
sun, rising and setting, if the learned Brāhmaṇa offer the Prayers, he
obtains all that is good.’

*Śaṅkha (Parāśaramādhava*, p. 275).—‘The Morning Twilight is accompanied
by stars, and the Evening one by the sun; both these one should
observe.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

101	Let him stand during the morning twilight, muttering the Savitri until the sun appears, but (let him recite it), seated, in the evening until the constellations can be seen distinctly.
</details>
