+++
title = "104 अपां समीपे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Convinced of the necessary character of the injunction, and retiring to the forest on a spot near water, one may even recite the Sāvitrī only, with a clean body and a collected mind.—(104)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अपरः स्वाध्यायविधिः । प्रकरणान्तरे ऽश्रुतत्वात् पूर्वस्माद् ग्रहणार्थाद् भिद्यते । 

- बहिर् ग्रामान् निर्जनो देश **अरण्यम्** । तद् **गत्वा** प्राप्य **आपां समीपे** नदीवाप्यादिस्थाने । तदभावे कमण्डल्वादिभाजनस्थानाम् अपि । **नियतः** शुचिर् यत्नवान् वा । **समाहितः** परित्यक्तचित्तव्याक्षेपः । **सावित्रीम् अप्य् अधीयीत** । यदि बहुसूक्तानुवाकाध्यायादि कयाचित् कार्यातिपत्त्या न शक्यते । **नैत्यकं विधिम् आस्थितः** । नित्य एव नैत्यकः । नित्यो ऽयं विधिर् इत्य् एवं स्थितप्रज्ञः । ग्रहणार्थश् च स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविधिः प्रकृतिः, अयं विकारः संस्तदीयान् धर्मान् गृह्णाति । तेन "ब्रह्मणः प्रणवम्," "प्राक्कूलान्" (म्ध् १.७४, ७५) इत्यादिधर्मो भवति ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु विधिर् विधा प्रकार इत्य्कर्तव्यतेत्यादि चक्षते । नित्ये ब्रह्मचारिणावश्यकर्तव्ये स्वाध्यायाध्ययने[^३२५] विधेतिकर्तव्यता ताम् आश्रितः । अस्य तु विधेस् तदा नित्यत्वं "ब्रह्मसत्रं हि तत् स्मृतम्" (म्ध् २.१०६) इत्यादिवाक्येभ्यो ऽवसातव्यम् । 


[^३२५]:
     M G 1st ed.: -dhyayana

- <u>आद्यम्</u> एव व्याख्यानं युक्तरूपं दृश्यते । न हि विधिशब्दः प्रकारवचनतया प्रसिद्धः । यदि च नैत्यकशब्देन ब्रह्मचारिणो विधिर् उच्यते तदा "नैत्यके नास्त्य् अनध्यायः" (म्ध् २.१०६) इत्य् अत्रापि नैत्यकशब्देन तस्यैवाभिधानं स्यात् ततश् चानध्ययनिषेधस् तत्रैव[^३२६] प्रसज्येत ॥ १०४ ॥


[^३२६]:
     M G add: na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is another injunction in connection with Vedic study; and as what
is here stated has not been mentioned in any other context, the ‘study’
herein laid down must be different from that ‘study’ which is undertaken
for the purpose of getting up the Text.

‘*Forest*’—stands for some solitary spot outside the
village;—‘*retiring*’ to such a spot;—‘*near water*’—on the bank of a
river or tank, etc.; or in the absence of these, even near water
contained in the water-pot and such other vessels.

‘*Niyataḥ'*—may mean either ‘with clean body,’ or‘with due effort.’

‘*Samāhitaḥ*,’ ‘*with collected mind*,’—*i.e*., free from all mental
distractions.

‘*One may even recite the Sāvitrī*,’—*i.e*., if on account of the
interference of some sort of business, he is unable to recite many hymns
or sections or chapters.

‘*Convinced of the necessary character of the injunction*.’—‘*Naityaka*’
is the same as ‘*nitya*.’—Having made up his mind that the injunction is
a compulsory one.

The injunction of studying the Veda for the purpose of getting up the
Text forms the ‘archetype’; and of that the present injunction is the
‘ectype,’ and as such it includes all the details of the former; so that
the rules regarding the pronouncing of the syllable ‘*om*’ at the
beginning of Vedic Study (laid down in 74) and the sitting upon
Kuśa-grass with ends pointing towards the East (laid down in 75),
appertain to the present injunction also.

Others have explained the term ‘*vidhi*’ to stand for ‘*vidhā*,’
*method*, *procedure*; the meaning (of the phrase ‘*naityakam
vidhimāsthitaḥ*’) being ‘taking his stand upon the procedure laid down
for the study of the Veda, which is necessary for,—must be done by—the
Religious Student.’ The compulsory character of this method would have
to be deduced from what follows in verse 106 below, regarding ‘this
being called *Brahmasatra*.’

The former explanation appears to be the right one; for as a matter of
fact, the term ‘*vi* *dhi*’ is not known to be denotative of *method*.
Further, if the term ‘*naityakam*’ stands for what should be done by the
Religious Student, then the same term as occurring in verse 106 will
also have to be taken in the same sense; and in that case the
prohibition of ‘non-study’ therein contained would come to apply to the
same,—*i.e*., to that which must be done by the Religious Student (which
is absurd).—(101)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 312), as laying down the
place and other details in connection with the Twilight’ Prayers;—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 281); in *Aparārka* (p. 70), as indicating that in
the event of the man being unable to perform the entire *Brahmayajña* he
may do it by means of the *Sāvitrī* alone; and again on p. 136;—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 38a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vyāsa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 275).—‘In the house, the Twilight prayer
is onefold; in cow-pen, tenfold; on the river ten-thousandfold; near
Viṣṇu, it is infinite.’

*Mahābhārata* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 275).—‘Twilight prayer is tenfold,
when performed outside, near a tank or a stream; at a sacred *tîrtha*,
it is a hundredfold; and thousandfold on the bank of the Ganges.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra* (2. 5. 14-15),—‘They declare that the Praṇava,
the Vyāhṛtis and the Sāvitrī,—the five Brahmic Sacrifices,—all this done
daily absolves the Brāhmaṇa from sins.—Being purified by the five
Brahmic Sacrifices they appease the lords.’

*Śātātapa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 276).—‘Lying, smell of liquor, sexual
intercourse during the day, eating of Śūdra’s food,—all these sins are
removed by offering the Twilight Prayer outside.’

*Śātātapa* (*Parāśaramādhava* 6. 6. 7).—‘Daily he should carry on Vedic
Study beginning with the Praṇava; thus does he fulfil the Brahmic
Sacrifice;—Vedic Study constituting the Brahmic Sacrifice.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

104	He who (desires to) perform the ceremony (of the) daily (recitation), may even recite the Savitri near water, retiring into the forest, controlling his organs and concentrating his mind.
</details>
