+++
title = "105 वेदोपकरणे चैव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There is no regard for (observance of) days forbidden for study in connection with the appurtenances to the Veda, and with the mantras recited during oblations.—(105)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उपकरणम्** उपकारकं वेदाङ्गं कल्पसूत्रनिरुकाद्य् उच्यते । तस्मिन् पठ्यमाने **ऽनध्याये** ऽप्य् **अनुरोध** आदरो **नास्ति** । **अनध्याये** **होममन्त्रेषु चैव ह्य्** अनध्याया नादरणीयाः[^३२७] । अनध्यायेष्व् अध्येतव्यम् । न निरोध इति वा पाठः । निवृत्तिर् अनध्यायेष्व् अध्ययनस्य नास्ति । 


[^३२७]:
     M G: nādaraṇīyā

- यद्य् अप्य् अध्ययनविधिधर्मो ऽनध्यायेष्व् अनध्ययनम्, अध्ययनविधिश् च स्वाध्यायविषयः, स्वाध्यायश् च वेदो, न च वेदशब्दवाच्यान्य् अङ्गानि, तथापि वेदवाक्यमिश्रत्वात् तद्बुद्धिः[^३२८] स्याद् इति स्पष्टार्थम् उच्यते । 


[^३२८]:
     M G 1st ed.: -miśratvabuddhiḥ; G 2nd ed.: -miśratvāt buddhiḥ

- दृष्टान्तो वायम् । वेदाङ्गेष्व् इव वेदे ऽप्य् अनध्यायो नास्ति । 

- **होममन्त्रेष्व्** अग्निहोत्रहोमे ये मन्त्रा अन्यस्मिन् वा सावित्रादिशान्तिहोमे । एतच् च प्रदर्शनार्थम् । शश्वज्जपप्रैषादिमन्त्राणां कर्माङ्गानां वैदिकवाक्योच्चारणमात्रधर्मो ऽनध्यायानध्ययनं स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविधिप्रयुक्त इति मन्यमानो होमादिमन्त्रेषु चतुर्दश्यादिष्व् अनुच्चारणं प्रपद्येत यः, स न्यायसिद्धेनार्थेनानूद्यमानेन प्रतिबोध्यते । स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविधिप्रयुक्तम् अनध्यायानुक्रमणं न वेदधर्मः, ततो नास्ति कर्माङ्गमन्त्रेष्व् अनध्यायः । **नैत्यके स्वाध्याये** पूर्वेण वाक्येन सर्वाश्रमिणां विहिते नित्ये स्वाध्यायविधौ ॥ २.१०५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Appurtenance*’ is that which helps; *i.e*., aids to Vedic study; the
subsidiary treatises on Kalpasūtra, Nirukta and so forth. When these are
being studied, no regard—no attention—need he paid to ‘days forbidden
for study’; similarly *with the Mantras recited during
oblations*,—holidays need not be observed; that, is, all this study
should he carried on also during the days forbidden for study.

Another reading (for ‘*anurodhaḥ*’) is ‘*nīrodhaḥ*,’ meaning
‘*cessation*’; the meaning being that even on ‘days forbidden for study’
there is no cessation of the study of what are specified in the verse.

Though it is one of the necessary conditions of the injunction of
‘study’ that there should be no study on holidays, and this injunction
pertains to the ‘study’ of ‘*Svādhyāya*,’ which is Veda,—and the
subsidiary treatises are not called ‘Veda,’—yet people might be led to
think that these latter also are interspersed with passages from the
Veda; hence the Text makes it quite clear.

Or, the ‘subsidiary treatises’ may he taken only as an instance; the
sense being that ‘just as there is no holiday in the case of the
subsidiary Treatises so is there none in the case of the Veda also.’

‘*With Mantras recited during oblations*’;—*i.e*., those Mantras that
are recited during the Agnihotra-oblations, or those recited during the
*Sāvitra* and other propitiatory oblations. All this is merely by way of
illustration. This fact, which is fully sustained by reason, is
explained here for the benefit of persons who might think that the rule
regarding the ceasing of study on holidays pertains to the uttering of
any and every Vedie passage, such as the Mantras included under the
‘*śaśvat-japa*’ and ‘*Praiṣas*,’—all which form the subject-matter of
the injunction of Vedic Study,—and might conclude that on the
*Caturdaśī* and such other holidavs, even the Mantras in connection with
oblations should not be recited. As a matter of fact, the observing of
holidays laid down in connection with Vedic Study prescribed by the
injunction of Study does not pertain to all Veda; and there are no
holidays in connection with Mantras recited during the performance of
religious rites.

‘*In connection with the daily study of the Veda*’;—*i.e*., in
connection with that study of the Veda which has been enjoined in a
preceding text as compulsory for men in all stages of life.—(105)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 149), as an
exception to the rule mentioning certain days as ‘unfit for study’;—and
the term ‘*upakaraṇa*’ is explained as *aṅgāni*, ‘the subsidiary
sciences’; and the ‘*nitya-svādhyāya*’ as that reciting of Vedic texts
which constitutes the ‘*Brahmayajña*’. The same work quotes it again (on
p. 314) as precluding the *Brahmayajña* from the scope of the rule
prohibiting the reading of Vedic texts on certain days.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (I, p. 534) as embodying an exception
to the rule regarding days unfit for study;—and again in II, p. 262 as
embodying an eulogy on *Brahmayajña*;—also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 105)
as laying down a case where the rules relating to time unfit for study
do not apply;—and also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 537), as the
foremost exception to the rules regarding days unfit for study.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 137), where ‘*vedopakaraṇa*’ is explained
as ‘*vedāṅga*’;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 141), which construes the
passage as ‘*vedopakaraṇe naityake nānadhyāyaḥ*,’ as otherwise there
would be conflict with other texts;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, pp.
148 and 162) which adds the following notes: ‘*Vedopakaraṇa*’ are the
*Vedāṅgas*—‘*nitya-svādhyāya*’ is *Brahmayajña*;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 775);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 59), which supplies the same
explanation of ‘*nityasvādhyāya*’;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 338),
which explains ‘*Vedopakaraṇa*’ as the *Vedaṇgas*, and notes that the
singular number is used since the noun is treated as a *class-name*.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verses 105-106)  
**

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2. 4. 12. 9).—‘There are forbidden days for
study, but none for the reciting of Mantras during religious acts.’

*Śaunaka* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 149).—‘For the compulsory recitation,
for sacrifices, for a certain purpose and for the repetition of the
texts, there are no forbidden days for the Vedas; nor in the reciting or
imparting of Mantras.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (4. 12. 3).—‘Vedic study is Brahma-Yajña.’

*Śaunaka* (*Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra*, p. 537).—‘There are no forbidden
days for the Daily Sacrifices, nor for the subsidiary Sciences, nor for
sacrificial performances, nor for the repeating of lessons, nor in the
receiving of Mantras. There is no day forbidden for the reciting of
Mantras in the worshipping of gods.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (*Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra*, p. 538).—‘There is no day
forbidden for the Obligatory Rites, nor in the offering of Twilight
Prayers, nor in the Upākarma rites, nor in the reciting of the
Homa-mantras... There are no forbidden Days for the study of the
Subsidiary Sciences, or of Itihāsas and Purāṇas... One should always
study the Brahmavidyā, and repeat the Sāvitrī, the Śatarudriya Hymn and
also the Vedanta texts.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 150).—‘There is no day forbidden
for the study of the Subsidiary Sciences, or of Itihāsas and Purāṇas, or
of the Dharmaśāstras. But these should be avoided on the *Parva* days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

105	Both when (one studies) the supplementary treatises of the Veda, and when (one recites) the daily portion of the Veda, no regard need be paid to forbidden days, likewise when (one repeats) the sacred texts required for a burnt oblation.
</details>
