+++
title = "107 यः स्वाध्यायम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, clean and self-controlled, recites the Veda, in due form, for one year,—for him this constantly fours out milk, curd, clarified butter and honey.—(107)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रकृतविधिशेषो ऽयम् । स च नित्यः समधिगतः । नित्ये च फलश्रवणम् अर्थवादः । न च विधिविभक्तिर् विद्यते । येन "एकस्य तूभयत्वे संयोगः पृथक्त्वम्" (प्म्स् ४.३.५) इत्य् अनेन न्यायेनाधिकारान्तरहेतुः पयःप्रभ्र्तिः स्यात् । लब्धे च नित्ये ऽधिकारे रात्रिसत्रन्यायो ऽपि नास्ति, येन पयआदीनि निष्फलत्वेन कल्पेरन् । तस्माद् अर्थवाद एवायम्, अधीयानस्य लोकपक्त्या प्रतिग्रहादिना गोलाभात् पयःप्रभृतेः प्रक्षरणानुवादस्यालम्बनम् । 

- **स्वाध्यायं** वेदम् **अधीते ऽब्दं** संवत्सरं **विधिना** प्राक्कूलाध्यासनेन **नियतः** संयतेन्द्रियः **शुचिः** स्नानादिना **तस्य** पुरुषस्य **नित्यं** यावज्जीवं **क्षरति** स्रवति ददाति । एषः स्वाध्यायः । **पयोदध्**ईति । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु धर्मार्थकाममोक्षान् पयआदिभिः शब्दैर् अभिहितान् मन्यन्ते । **पयः** शुद्धिसामान्याद् धर्मः, **दधि** पुष्टिहेतुत्वाद् अर्थः, स्नेहसामान्यात् **घृतं** कामः, सर्वरसैक्यान् **मधु** मोक्षः । यावान् कश्चन पुरुषार्थः स सर्वो वेदाध्ययनात् संवत्सरेणैव प्राप्यते, किं पुनर् बहुना कालेन । 

- अर्थवादत्वात् पयआदिशब्दानां को ऽर्थो युक्त इति नाभिनिवेष्टव्यम् ॥ २.१०७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This also is supplementary to the Injunction under consideration. The
Injunction has been understood to be a compulsory one; and the mention
of results in connection with compulsory injunctions is purely
valedictory; nor do we find any Injunctive affix (in the present verse);
so that the principle enunciated in the *Mīmāṃsā Sūtra* 1.3.5 not
applying to the present case, the mention of ‘milk, curd and the rest’
could not be taken as laying down a fresh motive for another action; and
when the compulsory character of the Injunction has been ascertained,
the principle of the ‘also is not applicable; so tbat ‘milk’ and the
rest could not be regarded as of any use. For all these reasons the
passage must be regarded as a purely valedictory description; and it is
based upon the fact that one who studies the Veda regularly becomes
famous among people, and hence becoming the recipient of gifts of
cattle, be naturally obtains large quantities of milk, etc.

‘*Svādhyāya*’—Veda;—‘*udhīte*’—recites;—‘for one year’—for one full year
;—‘*in due form*,’—*i.e*., seated upon Kuśa-grass with its tips pointing
eastwards;—‘*self-controlled*,’—*i.e*., with the organs under bis full
control;—‘*clean*’—by means of bathing, etc.,; ‘*for him*’—for that
man;—‘*constantly*’—as long as he lives;—‘*pours out*’—makes to flow,
supplies;—‘*this*’—recitation;—‘*milk*, *curd*, *etc*.’

Others hold that the terms ‘*payaḥ*’ (‘milk’) and the rest stand
respectively for Merit, Worldly Prosperity, Pleasure and Pinal
Liberation. Merit is called ‘milk’ because the two are similar in the
point of purity; Worldly Prosperity is called ‘curd,’ because it
resembles the latter in being a source of strengthening the body;
Pleasure is called ‘clarified butter,’ because of the resemblance
consisting in both containing ‘*Sneha*’ (smoothness); Pinal Liberation
is called ‘honey’ because it combines in one all flavours. The meaning
thus is that all the purposes of man are accomplished in a single year,
what to say of the study being continued for a longer time!

As the whole passage is purely valedictory, we need not be very
particular as to what is the right signification of the terms ‘milk’ and
the rest.—(107)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Payo dadhi ghṛtam madhu*’—stand respectively for Merit, Wealth,
Pleasure and Final Release, according to Nārāyaṇa and Nandana.
Medhātithi notes this explanation as provided by ‘others.’

*Medhātithi* (p. 124, 1. 15)—‘*Ekasya tūhhayatve*’—This is Mīmāṃsā Sūtra
4. 3. 4. There are two texts—‘makes an offering of curd’ and ‘for the
benefit of one desiring sense-organs, one should sacrifice with curd’;
the question that arises is whether these two texts lay down two
distinct acts, or both conjointly enjoin a single act; and the
conclusion is that the two acts are distinct.

This principle, Medhātithi argues, is not applicable to the present
case; the mention of the four distinct substances cannot he taken as
supplying the motive for four distinct acts.

*Medhātithi* (p. 124,1. 16)—‘*Rātrisatranyāyaḥ*’—This is enunciated in
Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 4. 3. 17 *et seq*. In connection with the *Rātrisatra*
sacrifice, it has been held that it is conducive to ‘respectability,’
even though this is a result mentioned in an Arthavāda passage. This
principle also is not applicable to the present case where the necessary
motive is provided by the compulsory character of the act.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (30. 34-38).—‘When one recites the Ṛk verses, he satisfies
the Pitṛs with clarified butter;—when he recites the Yajuṣ verse, he
satisfies them with honey;—when he recites the Sāma verses, he satisfies
them with milk;—when he recites the Atharva verses, he satisfies them
with meat;—when he reads the Purāṇas, the Itihāsas, the Vedic Subsidiary
Sciences and the Dharmaśāstras,—he satisfies them with grain-food.’

*Yājñavalkya-Smṛti* (1. 41-47).—‘One who daily reads the Ṛk verses
satisfies the gods and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter;—he who
reads the Yajuṣ verses every day, to the best of his ability, satisfies
the gods with clarified butter and the Pitṛs with clarified butter and
honey;—he who reads the Sāma verses daily satisfies the gods with Soma
and clarified butter, and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter;—he
who daily reads the Atharvāñgiras texts satisfies the gods with fat and
the Pitre with honey and clarified butter;—he who to the best of his
capacity, daily reads the Vākovākya, Purāṇa, the Narāśamsī hymns,
ītihāsa and the Sciences, satisfies the gods with meat, milk, rice and
honey, and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter—all these being
satisfied endow him with all kinds of prosperity.’

*Āpastamba-Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 3. 2-3).—‘When one reads the Ṛk verses he
satisfies the gods with offerings of milk;—when he reads the Yajuṣ
verses, with offerings of clarified butter;—when he reads the Sāma
verses, with offerings of honey;—when he reads the Atharvāñgiras verses,
with offerings of Soma;—when he reads the Brāhmaṇas, the Kalpas, the
Nārāśamsī hymns, the Itihāsas and the Purāṇas,—with offerings of nectar.
When he reads the Ṛk verses, streams of milk reach his Pitṛs;—when he
reads the Yajuṣ verses, streams of clarified butter;—when he reads the
Sāma verses, streams of honey;—when he reads the tharvāúgiras verses,
streams of Soma;—when he reads the Brāhmaṇas, the Kalpas, the Nārāśamsī
hymns, the Itihāsas and Purāṇas, streams of nectar.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

107	For him who, being pure and controlling his organs, during a year daily recites the Veda according to the rule, that (daily recitation) will ever cause sweet and sour milk, clarified butter and honey to flow.
</details>
