+++
title = "108 अग्नीन्धनम् भैक्षचर्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-born person, whose Initiation has been performed, should continue to do, till the final Bath of “Return” (Samāvartana), tub kindling of fire, the begging of food, the sleeping on the ground and the acting for the teacher’s well- being.—(108)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सायंप्रातः समिद्भिर् अग्नेर् आदीपनम् **अगीन्धनम्** । अपर्यङ्कारोहणम् **अधःशय्या** । न तु स्थण्डिलशायित्वम् एव । गुरवे **हितम्** उदकुम्भाद्याहरणं शुश्रूषणलक्षणम् । यत् तु तदुपकारकरणं तद् यावज्जीविकम् । एतद् **आ** ब्रह्मचर्यसमाप्तेर् गुरुकुलनिवृत्तिलक्षणात् स्नानात् कर्तव्यम्, स्वाध्यायाध्ययनविध्यर्थत्वात् । ब्रह्मचर्यस्य तद्धर्माणां च यावद् ग्रहणम् अनुवृत्तिस् तन्निवृत्त्या च निवृत्तिः सिद्धैवेति ।

- अग्नीन्धनादीनां पुनर्वचनं तद्व्यतिरिक्तस्यातिक्रान्तस्य धर्मकलापस्योत्तरेषाम् अप्य् आश्रमिणाम् अनुष्ठानार्थम् । तथा च गौतमः- "उत्तरेषां चैतद् अविरोधि[^३३०]" इति (ग्ध् ३.९) । 


[^३३०]:
     M G 1st ed.: avirodhāt

- <u>अथैवं</u> कस्मान् न भवति एते यावद् ब्रह्मचर्यभाविनः, अन्ये पुनर् अर्वाग् अपि निवर्तन्त इति । स्मृत्यन्तरम् अत्रदर्शितम्[^३३१] । प्रधानकानानुवर्तिनश् च नियमा इत्य् एष न्यायः सत्यां गतौ[^३३२] स्यात् । 


[^३३२]:
     M G 1st ed. add: bādhitaḥ


[^३३१]:
     M G: smṛtyantaramātradarśita-

- गुरवे हितम् इति हितयोगे चतुर्थी (पाण् २.१.३६) न्याय्या ॥ २.१०८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*The kindling of fire*’—*i.e*., setting the fire aflame every morning
and evening by supplying fuel to it.

‘*Sleeping on the ground*’;—*i.e*., not ascending a bedstead, not
actually sleeping on the hare ground.

‘*Teacher’s well-being*,’—*i.e*., service consisting of the fetching of
water in jars and such other work. As for the doing of things beneficial
to him, this is to be done throughout life.

All this should be done till that Final Bath, which consists in
returning from the Teacher’s house, and which constitutes the end of
Religious Studentship; for the simple reason that all this is included
in the Injunction of ‘Vedic Study.’ As a matter of fact, the life of the
‘student’ and its appurtenant details have to continue till the Veda is
completely got up; so that as soon as this getting up is done, the
discontinuance of the details follows as a matter of course.

The reiteration of the ‘kindling of fire’ and other duties in the
present verse is meant to indicate that the duties other than
those—which have been previously prescribed for students—are incumbent
upon persons in the succeeding stages of life also (and are not confined
to the ‘student’ only). As says Gautama (3.9),—‘All this is not
incompatible with the succeeding stages of life.’

“But why cannot we have this that the duties specified in the present
verse are to continue during the whole studentship stage, while others
might be discontinued even beforehand?”

The opinion of other *Smṛtis* on this point has been already shown to be
that all rules are laid down in connection with their principal time;
(and this time in the present case being the entire studentship-stage)
if the course just suggested were adopted (and some of the present
duties were dropped before the end of that stage), we would be
needlessly going against this principle.

In place of the expression ‘*gurorhitam*’ the right form would have been
‘*gurave hitam*’ in the Dative, accordingly to Pāṇini 2.1.36, which lays
down the use of the Dative in connection with the term ‘*hita*.’—(108)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘Āsamāvartanāt ’—See 3. 3-4.

This verse, is quoted in Parāśaramādhava (Ācāra. p. 455), as laying down
the duties of the Student;—inVīramitrodaya (Saṃskāra, p. 489) as laying
down the ‘ miscellaneous duties ’ of the Student;—and in Aparārka (p.
76), as laying down the time-limit up to which the fire-tending and
other functions have to be kept up.

‘*Acting for the teacher’s well-being*.’ The details of this have been
described by Hārīta, quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 490)—‘By
fetching of water, Kuśa-grass, flowers, fuel, roots, fruits, sweeping
and washing of the house, bodily service and so forth,—he should
devotedly attend upon the Teacher, whose cast off clothes, bed and seat
he should never step over.’

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 46a);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 118), which adds that those mentioned here
indicate the other duties also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra* (2. 1. 20-21, 43).—‘Every day he should fetch
fuel from the forest and lay it;—he should rise before the Teacher and
sleep after him;—during the course of his study, he should attend upon
the Teacher and follow him.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 2. 15).—‘He should never bear malice
towards the Teacher.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 2. 11).—‘After initiation the boy should
live with the Teacher as a religious student.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.3.2. 20-21).—‘Always doing good to the
teacher, never crossing him in his words; sleeping on a lower bed.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 4. 13, 14, 16).—‘Morning and evening he
should fetch a jar of water;—always he should fetch fuel from the forest
and lay it down;—having kindled the fire and cleaned the place, he
should lay fuel upon it, both morning and evening, in accordance with
instructions.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.1. 3. 25).—‘Morning and evening he should beg
for food from people other than those that are wicked or accused of evil
deeds; and after having presented to the teacher all that he obtains, he
should live upon what the Teacher gives him.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (1. 3, 4, 5, 10, 11).—‘The Religious Student shall
serve the Teacher till ṭhe death of his body;—he shall keep his speech
under control and having begged food, he shall take it either during the
fourth or the sixth or the eighth part of the day;—he shall come to read
when called;—whatever food he obtains by begging, he shall present to
the Teacher, and shall eat only with his permission;—during the day, he
shall avoid sleeping on the bedstead, washing the teeth, applying of
collyrium to the eyes, oiling of the body, wearing of shoes and carrying
of the umbrella;—he shall rest during the night.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (27. 4, 7, 9, 12).—‘Both times he shall bathe and tend the
fire;—he shall do what is good for and agreeable to the Teacher;—he
shall beg alms from respectable families, but not from his Teacher’s
family;—he shall sleep on the ground.’

*Yājñavalkya-Smṛti* (1.25,27, 28).—‘Both morning and evening he shall
attend upon the fire;—he shall always do, with his mind, speech and body
what is good for his teacher; for his livelihood, he shall beg food from
respectable Brāhmaṇas.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (*Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra*, p. 489).—‘The Religious
Student shall always wear the girdle, the skin, the staff, the Upavīta,
the loin-slip and the waist-band.’

*Yama* (*Do. and Parāśaramādhava*, p. 455).—‘Living on food received in
alms, he shall live with the Teacher, and keep the staff, the water-pot,
the kuśa-bundle, muñja-girdle, and the vow of celibacy. The Religious
Student shall always carry the girdle, the skin, the staff, the sacred
thread, the loin-slip, and the thread round the loins.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘Sleeping after the Teacher and rising before him, living
in the teacher’s house, he shall do all that should be done by the pupil
and the servant; he shall always stay by his side, his constant
attendant; he shall not eat until the Teacher has eaten; nor shall he
drink water until the Teacher has drunk it; he shall not sit while the
Teacher is standing, nor sleep while he is sitting.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Do. 490).—‘He shall attend upon the Teacher, for purposes
of Vedic study; he shall read when he is called upon to do so: whatever
he obtains in alms he shall present to the Teacher.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘He shall serve the Teacher by fetching water, gathering
Kuśa, flowers, fuel, roots and fruits, sweeping, washing, bodily
service; he shall attend upon him while he is walking, sitting or
sleeping; he shall never sleep over what has been worn by him, or over
his bed and seat or wear his sandals or step over his shadow.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘He should be entirely subservient to the
Teacher,—except as regards the degrading crimes.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘Subservient to the Teacher, not independent, living in
the Teacher’s house, he shall rise before him and sleep after him; he
shall keep his sleep and food under control, suppressing indolence and
anger, fully self-controlled, ever attentive, free from egotism and
devoted to the service of the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do., p. 491).—‘He shall never sit on the same seat with his
Teacher, except upon rafts and boats.’

*Sumantu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 455).—‘Celibacy, austerity, alms-begging,
fire-tending during the twilights, Vedic study, service of the Teacher,
these the Religious Student shall observe.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

108	Let an Aryan who has been initiated, (daily) offer fuel in the sacred fire, beg food, sleep on the ground and do what is beneficial to this teacher, until (he performs the ceremony of) Samavartana (on returning home).
</details>
