+++
title = "117 लौकिकं वैदिकम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should first salute him from whom he receives knowledge, either temporal or scriptural or spiritual.—(117)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिक्रान्तं प्रासङ्गिकम् । अभिवादनविधिर् इदानीं प्रक्रम्यते । 

- लोके भवं **लौकिकं** लोकाचारशिक्षणम् । अथ वा गीतवादित्रकलानां ज्ञानं वात्स्यायनविशाखिकलाविषयग्रन्थज्ञानं वा । **वैदिकं** विधिनोदितं वेदवेदाङ्गस्मृतिविषयम् । आध्यात्मिकविद्यात्मोपनिषद्विद्या । आत्मोपचाराद् वा शरीरस्य वैदिकम् । एतज् **ज्ञानं** यतः शिक्षेत तं **पूर्वम्** उपदेष्टारं पुरुषम् **अभिवादयेत्** । प्रथमसंगमे यद् आशीःप्रयोगार्थं वक्ष्यमाणस्वरूपेण प्रयोगेण शब्देन संमुखीकरणं सो ऽभिवादयतेर् अर्थः । **पूर्वम्** इति प्रथमम् । तेनासौ संबोध्यः, न पुनस् तदीयं वचनम् अपेक्षितव्यम् । तदा हि प्रत्यभिवादयिता भवेत् । अभिवादयेद्[^३४७] इत्य् अनेनैव सिद्धत्वात् पूर्वशब्दो ऽनर्थक इति चेत् तन् न । सति ह्य् अस्मिन्न् अयम् अर्थो लभ्यते । धातूपसर्गार्थपर्यालोचनया ह्य् आभिमुख्येन वदनमात्रं प्रतीयते । अन्येनापि संबोधितस्य भवत्य् एव । ये तु पूर्वं स्वयोनिगुरुभ्य[^३४८] इति व्याचक्षते, तद् अप्रकृतसंशब्दितम् इत्य् उपक्ष्यम् ॥ २.११७ ॥


[^३४८]:
     M G 1st ed.: svayogi-


[^३४७]:
     M G 1st ed.: pratyabhivādayitābhivādayed
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The subject taken up having been finished, rules regarding salutation
are next taken up.

‘*Laukika*,’ ‘*temporal* is that which, pertains to worldly affairs;
*i.e*., the teaching of popular usage and custom; or it may mean the
teaching of the arts of singing, dancing and playing upon musical
instruments; or, it may mean the knowledge of what is contained in works
dealing with the Arts, such as those of Vātsyāyana, Viśākhin and others.

‘*Vaidika*,’ ‘*scriptural*,’ is that which is expressed by Vedic
injunctions; that is the knowledge of the Veda, the Vedāṅgas and the
Smṛtis.

‘*Knowledge spiritual*’ stands for the esoteric science of the spirit or
soul; or figuratively, it may stand for that pertaining to the Body,
*i.e*., the science of medicine.

From whom one learns all this knowledge, such a teacher, he *should
salute first of all*; when one meets him for the first time (in the day)
he should invite his attention to himself, by means of words indicated
later on, for the purpose of obtaining from him words of blessing.

‘*First*,’—*I.e*., the pupil should address him first; he should not
wait for being addressed by the teacher; it is only in this way that he
would be a ‘saluter.’

*Objection*.—“If this is what is implied by the root *salute* itself,
the term ‘*first*’ becomes superfluous.”

Not so; it is only by virtue of the term ‘first’ that we deduce the said
meaning. If we took only the root and the prefix (in the verb)
‘*abhirādayet*’), we could only get the sense of *speaking*
(‘*vadanam*’) *in front* (‘*ābhimukhyena*’); and this *speaking in
front* is possible also when the speaker has been previously addressed
by another person.

Some people have explained the term ‘first’ to mean ‘before saluting
one’s parents.’ But this does not deserve consideration, as this
relative precedence bears no relation to the context.—(117)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 25);—in *Vidhānapārijāta*
(p. 501);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 296), as mentioning the person
to whom, among a number of people, the salutation is to be offered
first;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 460); where ‘*laukikam*’ is
explained as *arthaśāstrīyādi*, and ‘*ādhyātmikam*’ as
*brahmapratipādakaśāstrīyādi*;—‘*pūrvan*’ as *bahumānyasamavāye
prathamam*;—and it proceeds to point out that among the teachers
enumerated, the succeeding one is to have priority over the preceding
one;—also in *Aparārka* (p. 54) without comment;—and again on p.
142;—also in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 97) as laying down the order
in which salutation has to be offered when there are a number of
Brāhmaṇas assembled;—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 44a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, (1.2,15).—‘He should never bear malice towards
him.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (5.19-20).—‘He should be always saluted; some
people hold that the Teacher’s feet should he clasped.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (14.7-9)—‘When one has completed his study he
should clasp the feet of all his superiors;—also when he meets them on
returning from a journey;—there should he clasping of the feet of
brothers and sisters, in the order of seniority.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (13.12).—‘The feet should be clasped of one who is
superior either in Vedic learning or in birth.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (27. 14-17).—‘Having offered the Twilight Prayers, he
should salute the Teacher:—he should touch his feet with reverent hands,
the right with the right and the left with the left;—at the salutation,
he should also announce his name, ending with the term *bhoḥ*.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra* (3.1.27).—‘Wearing of the girdle, begging alms,
fetching fuel, water-sipping, morning-salutation,—these are obligatory
daily duties.’

*Śānkhyāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 460).—‘Daily, one
shall salute the Teacher, as also his elders—of these, the Vedic scholar
whenever one meets him; and one who is not learned in the Veda, only
when one meets him on returning from a journey.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘One should salute, first of all, that person from
whom one acquires knowledge, either temporal or scriptural or related to
Dharma.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

117	(A student) shall first reverentially salute that (teacher) from whom he receives (knowledge), referring to worldly affairs, to the Veda, or to the Brahman.
</details>
