+++
title = "119 शय्यासने ऽध्याचरिते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should not sit with a superior upon the couch or seat prepared for him. and if he himself should happen to be seated on a couch or skat, he should rise to meet (the superior) and salute him.—(119)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

शय्या चासनं चेति "जातिर् अप्राणिनाम्" (पाण् २.४.६) इति द्वन्द्वैकवद्भावः । तस्मिन् **श्रेयसा** विद्याद्यधिकेन गुर्वादिना च न **समाविशेन्** न सहासीत । किं सर्वस्मिन्न् एव । नेत्य् आह । **अध्याचरिते** कल्पिते शय्यात्वेनासनत्वेन च । यत् तु शिलाफलकादिस् तत्र न दोषः । वक्ष्यति च "आसीत[^३५०] गुरुणा सार्धम्" (म्ध् २.२०४) इति तस्यैवायम् अनुवादः । 


[^३५०]:
     M G 1st ed.: āsīd

- <u>अन्ये</u> व्याचक्षत **अध्याचरिते** अधिष्ठित इति । **न समाविशेत्** तत्रोत्तरकालम् अपि, न केवलं सहासनप्रतिषेधः । स हि वक्ष्यमाणेनैव सिद्धः । विधौ च संभवति नानुवादो युक्तः । 

- <u>तत्र केचिद्</u> आचारतो भेदं व्याचक्षते । यद् गुरोर् असाधारण्येन शय्यात्वेनासनत्वेन च विज्ञातम्, यत्र गुरुः शेते आस्ते च, तत्र शिष्यः प्रत्यक्षं प्रोक्षं च नोपविशेत् । यत्र तु कथंचिद् एते क्रिये गुरुणा कृते तत्र गुरोर् अप्रत्यक्षं प्रतिषेधः । ईदृशम् एव्**आध्याचरितम्** उच्यते, न स्वस्वामिसंबन्धेन यद् अधिष्ठानम् ।

- **शय्यासनस्थस्य** च यदि श्रेयान् आगच्छति तदा तत उत्थायाभिवादनं कर्तव्यम् । यत् तु "यानासनस्थः" (म्ध् २.२०२) इति तद् गुरूद्दिष्टम्[^३५१] अवरोहणम् । शय्यासनत्याग एव भूमिष्ठेन कर्तव्य इति तस्यार्थः । इदं त्व् अगुरोः श्रेयसः प्रत्युत्थानम् आसनस्थस्यैव संभवति ॥ २.११९ ॥


[^३५१]:
     M G: guruviṣayam
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The copulative compound ‘*śayyāsane*’ is formed with the terms ‘*śayyā*’
and ‘*āsana*,’ the singular number being in accordance with Pāṇini
2.4.6, by which‘terms expressing in-animate genuses form copulative
compounds in the singular.’

‘*On a couch and seat*,’ ‘*one should not sit*’—along with—‘*a
superior*’;—*i.e*., one who is superior in learning, such as the teacher
and others.

In view of the question as to whether one should not sit with his
superior anywhere, the text has added the word ‘*adhyācarite*,’
‘*prepared*,’ *i.e*., made up, as the couch or a seat; so that there is
no harm in sitting upon a seat of stone or such other things.

This is only a re-iteration of what is going to be said under 204 below
that—‘One may sit with his teacher on slabs of stone, a boat.’

Others explain the term ‘*adhyācarite*’ to mean ‘*occupied*’; and
‘*should not* *sit*’ to mean that ‘he should not sit upon it even
afterwards.’ And (according to this explanation) the present prohibition
does not apply only to sitting along with the superior; as this
prohibition is already contained in 203; and so long as the present
verse can be taken as an independent injunction, it is not right to take
it as a mere re-iteration.

(In view of this last objection) some people point to a difference
(between what is said here and what comes later on in 203), based upon
usage. That couch or seat which is known to belong specifically to the
Teacher,—that whereupon he, as a rule, lies down and sits,—on that the
pupil should never sit, cither in the presence or absence of the
Teacher; while that couch or seat upon which the Teacher has slept or
sat, once by the way,—sitting upon that during the Teacher’s presence is
what is prohibited. And it is this latter that is meant by the term
‘*adhyāca*’ in the text; which does not mean actual *possession* of the
couch by the Teacher.

While one is seated upon a couch or seat, if the superior should happen
to come, he should rise to meet him and offer hi s salutation. What is
meant by the second line of the verse is that the pupil should descend
from this seat on the advent of the Teacher; the meaning being that
standing upon the bare ground he should entirely relinquish the couch or
seat. While as for superior persons other than the Teacher,—in their
case the rising to meet is done even while one remains (standing) upon
the seat.—(119)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Adhyācarte*’—‘Prepared’ (Medhātithi);—‘occupied’ (Kullūka). This verse
is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 460).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (1.2.20-21).—‘Within sight of the Teacher one
should avoid the following—sitting with a piece of cloth passing round
the neck and the two knees, spreading out of the legs, spitting,
laughing, yawning, finger-snapping.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (1.2.31).—‘One should leave his bed or seat before
answering the Teacher’s call.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1 6.3-5).—‘One should not put forward his legs
towards the Teacher;—some people hold that no such spreading is
reprehensible when the Teacher is seated on a bedstead;—near the Teacher
one should speak to him lying down.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.8-11).—‘One should not sit on the bed or the
seat before the Teacher.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

119	One must not sit down on a couch or seat which a superior occupies; and he who occupies a couch or seat shall rise to meet a (superior), and (afterwards) salute him.
</details>
