+++
title = "122 अभिवादात् परम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa, when greeting an elder, should, after the accosting, pronounce his name, (saying) “this here, I am named so and so,”—(122)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

येअन् शब्देन परः संबोध्यते, आशिषं प्रति प्रयोज्यते, कुशलप्रश्नं वा कार्यते, सो ऽभिवादः । अस्माद् **अभिवादाद्** अभिवादप्रतिपादकाच् छब्दात् **परम्** अव्यवहितपूर्वं इमं[^३५२] शब्दम् उच्चारयेत्- **असौ नामाहम् अस्मीत्य्** । असाव् इति सर्वनाम सर्वविशेषप्रतिपादकम् । अभिमुखीकरणार्थो ऽयम् ईदृशः शब्दप्रयोगः "मया त्वम् अभिवाद्यसे आशीर्वादार्थम् अभिमुखीक्रियसे" । ततो ऽध्येषणाम् अवगम्य प्रत्यभिवादम् आशीर्दानादि कर्तुम् आरभते । 


[^३५२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: imaṃ

- न च सामान्यवाचिना सर्वनाम्ना प्रयुज्यमानेनैतद्[^३५३] उक्तं भवतीदं नामधेयेन मयाभिवाद्यसे इत्य् अतो ऽध्येषणाम् अनवबुध्य कस्याशिषं प्रयुङ्क्ताम् ।अपि च **स्वनाम परिकीर्तयेद्** इति श्रुतम् । तत्रासौ देवदत्तनामाहम् इत्य् उक्तेनाभिवादनं प्रतिपद्येत । असाव् इत्य् एतस्य पदस्यानर्थक्याद् अर्थानवसायः ।


[^३५३]:
     M G: prayojyamā-

- स्मृत्यन्तरतन्त्रेणापि व्यवहरन्ति च सूत्रकाराः । यथा पाणिनिः- "कर्मणि द्वितीया" (पाण् २.३.२) इति द्वितीयादिशब्दैः । इहाप्य् असाव् इति । "स्वं नामातिदिशत" इति यज्ञसूत्रे ऽपि परिभाषितम् । यद्य् एवं स्वं नामेत्य् अनेनैव सिद्धे ऽसौ नामेत्य् अनर्थकम् । नामशब्दप्रयोगार्थम् । कथम् । स्वं नाम कीर्तयेद् इदं नामाहम् इति । अनेन स्वरूपेणाहम् अस्मीति । समानार्थत्वाद् विकल्पं मन्यन्ते ।

- अत्र श्लोकद्वये[^३५४] एतावद् अभिवादनवाक्यस्य रूपं सिद्धम्- "अभिवादये देवदत्तनामाहं भोः" । उत्तरेण श्लोकेन भोर् इत्य् एतद् विधास्यते । **ज्यायांसम्** इति वचनात् समहीनानाम् अप्य् अभिवादनम् अस्ति, न त्व् अयं प्रकारः, ज्यायोविषयत्वाद् अस्य ॥ २.१२२ ॥


[^३५४]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: -dvaye
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Accosting*’ here stands for that word by which the other person is
addressed, is made to answer, either with words of benediction, or with
an inquiry after welfare. ‘*After this accosting*’—*i.e*., after the
word expressing such accosting,—*i.e*., in immediate sequence to the
word, one should pronounce the following expression—‘*This here I named
so and so*.’ ‘*This so and so*,’ ‘*man*,’ is a pronoun standing for all
particular name-forms. The use of this expression is meant to attract
tho attention (of the person accosted); the sense being—‘you are being
greeted by me,’ *i.e*., ‘you are being invited to pronounce your
benediction’; and being thus addressed, the other person, having duly
comprehended the invitation and request, proceeds to answer the greeting
by means of words expressing benediction.

But the mere use of the generic pronoun ‘this’ would not provide the
idea that ‘you are being accosted by me who am named this’; and in that
case the other person would not fully comprehend the invitation, and
hence to whom would be address the words of benediction? For this
reason, it has been declared that ‘*he should pronounce his name*’; so
that where accosted with the words ‘I am named Devadatta,’ the person
fully comprehends the greeting.

*Objection*.—“There being no use for the word ‘*this*,’ we see no
purpose in its use.”

*Answer*.—Writers often make use of expressions borrowed from the usage
of other *Smṛtis*; for example, they use the term ‘*Dvitīyā*,’ in the
sense of the *Accusative*, in accordance with the usage laid down by
Pāṇini in his Sūtra 2.3.2. In regard to the present subject, we find it
formulated in the *Yajñasūtra* that ‘the mentioning of one’s own name is
to be done with the word *this*.’

*Objection*.—“In that case that the name should be pronounced having
been already expressed by the words ‘*he should pronounce his name*,’—it
is superfluous for the text to repeat the term ‘name,’ in the expression
‘*this I am named*’?”

That expression has been added for the purpose of securing the use of
the term ‘name’; the sense being that, one should pronounce his name
saying ‘I am *named* so and so’ (and not merely ‘I am so and so.’)

According to others, both expressions mean the same thing ‘this here I
am such and such a person’; so that the use of the one or the other
expression is optional.

According to this verse, the exact form of the words of greeting comes
to be this—‘*abhivādaye devadattanāma’ham* *bhoḥ*,’ ‘I accost thee, Sir,
I who am named Devadatta the use of the ‘Sir’ being prescribed in the
following verse (124).

‘*Elder*’—the addition of this word in the text is meant to imply that
there should be *accosting* of equals and inferiors also, but in their
case, the form is not as laid down here, which is meant for the case of
*elders* only.—(122)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 25), where the following
notes are added:—‘*abhivādāt*,’ *i.e*., after the word ‘*ahhivādaye*,’
‘I salute’—one should mention his name, ‘I am so and so’;—the term
‘*vipra*’ stands for all the *twice-born* men;—also in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 45), which says that what is meant by ‘*abhivādāt*’ is ‘after having
pronounced the words ‘*I salute*’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
96), which adds the explanation ‘one should pronounce his own name, *I
am Devadatta*, after having saluted.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 450), where the following
explanation is added:—When saluting the elder—*i.e*., an aged
person—‘*abhivādātparam*’—*i.e*., after uttering the word
‘*abhivādaye*’, ‘I salute,’—one should utter his proper name, ‘I am so
and so.’ It has been declared in the *Yajñasūtra* that the generic
pronoun ‘*asau*’ (‘so and so’) indicates the proper name. Since the text
uses the term ‘elder,’ it follows that the method here laid down is not
to be employed in saluting such *uncles* and other superior relatives as
are younger in age to the saluter; the method for saluting them is going
to be described later on. The term ‘*Vipra*’ includes the *Kṣatriya* and
the rest also; as is clear from the rules regarding the returning of
salutation, under verse 127 below.

On the expression ‘*ahamasmi*,’ this work quotes Medhātithi’s remark
that both ‘*aham*’ and ‘*asmi*’ meaning the same thing, the use of the
one or the other is optional. But this has been quoted as the opinion of
‘others’ by Medhātithi. This view is rejected by Vīramitrodaya as being
repugnant to Manu, verse 122. It rejects the view of Kullūka also, who
opines that the term ‘*nāma*’ need not be used in the formula.

This verse is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 296) where too
the term ‘*abhivādātparam*’ is explained to mean—‘Having first uttered
the words *I salute*, he should pronounce his name’;—and in Aparārka (p.
52), which says that the formula is ‘*abhivādaye caitranāmāhamasmi
bhoḥ*.’;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 52), which *bìiivādaye caitranāmāhamasmi*
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (1.6.5.)—‘Having announced his name he should say
*Here I am*,—such is the form of salutation on the meeting of a learned
man.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra* (1.2.27).—‘Saying *Here I am Sir*, he should
touch his ears, for securing attention,’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.5-12).—‘In the morning one should salute the
Teacher, saving *Here I am*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*.—‘ He should say *Here I am Sir* to all those persons
who are entitled to their feet being clasped by him.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (27.17).—‘He should announce his name and at the end of
the salutation should pronounce the word *bhoḥ*.’

*Yajñavalkya* (1.26).—‘Then he should salute the elders, saying *Here I
am*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

122	After the (word of) salutation, a Brahmana who greets an elder must pronounce his name, saying, 'I am N. N.'
</details>
