+++
title = "123 नामधेयस्य ये"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

To those persons who do not comprehend the (significance of the) name (pronounced) in the words of greeting, the wise one should say ‘I’; similarly to all, women.—(123)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वित्ताद्याधिक्येनाविदुषो ऽपि यथाविध्य् अभिवाद्यतायां प्राप्तायां तन्निवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् । **ये केचिद्** अविद्वांसो **नामधेयस्य** संस्कृतस्योच्चारितस्य **अभिवादम्** अभिवादार्थम् । अभिवादिता एतेन वयम् इत्य् अवैय्याकरणा **न जानतेम्** संस्कृतं नावबुध्यन्ते, **तान् प्राज्ञो** नारीश् चाभिवाद्याः । एते न संस्कृतम् उच्यमानं प्रतिपद्यते, तत्र विध्येकदेशं स्वनामग्रहणं हित्वा "अभिवादये ऽहम्" इत्य् एतावद् एव **ब्रूयात्** । तद् अपि चेन् नावबुध्यन्ते, लौकिकेनापभ्रंशेनाप्य् अभिवाद्या इत्य् एवमर्थं **प्राज्ञ**ग्रहणम् । तदीयाम् अबोधशक्तिं ज्ञात्वोहितव्यो ऽभिवादप्रयोगो नोपदेश एवादर्तव्यः । **स्त्रियो** ऽप्य्[^३५५] एवम् एव । सर्वग्रहणं गुरुपत्नीनां संस्कृतप्रयोगज्ञानाम् अपि । 


[^३५५]:
     M G: striyāpy

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु य उपनामिकया प्रसिद्धो वनमालीवर्ण इति, पितृकृतं यत् तस्य नाम तन् न प्रसिद्धम्, यत् प्रसिद्धं न तन् नामेत्य् अतो ऽसौ स्वनाम कीर्तयेत् ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु प्रत्यभिवादं न जानत इति वर्णयन्ति । "प्रत्यभिवादे ऽशूद्रे" (पाण् ८.२.८३) इति नामान्ते प्लुतो विहितः । तं ये न विदुस् तेष्व् अहम् इत्य् एव वाच्यम् । व्याकरणप्रयोजनोपन्यासप्रसङ्गेन चैतन् महाभाष्यकारेण प्रदर्शितम् । 

- अविद्वांसः प्रत्यभिवादे नाम्नो ये न प्लुतिं विदुः । 

- कामं तेषु तु विप्रोष्य स्त्रीष्व् इवायम् अहं वदेत् ॥ (पत् इ- ३)

स्मृत्यन्तरसामर्थ्याद् एवायम् अभिवादशब्दः प्रत्यभिवादे वर्तत इत्य् आहुः । 

- यदि चैतद् एवं न व्याख्यायते तदा नाभिवाद्यः स विदुषेति सर्वेण सर्वम् अभिवादप्रतिषेधः आश्रीयमाणे "अयम् अहं वदेद्" इति स्मृत्यन्तरविरोधः । अस्मिंस् त्व् एवं व्याख्याते स प्रतिषेधः स्तुत्यालम्बनो न विधायक एतद् अर्थानुसारितया नीयते ॥ २.१२३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From what has come before it might be understood that even an unlearned
person deserves to be saluted, by reason of the large amount of wealth
he might possess; the present verse serves to preclude such a notion.

‘*Those who*,’ being uneducated;—‘*of the name*’—in its Sanskrit form
that may have been pronounced,—‘*the significance, as pronounced in the
words of greeting*’; persons, not conversant with grammar do not
understand the words to mean that ‘I have been accosted by this
person,’—they do not understand the Sanskrit language.—To such persons,
as also to women who deserve to be saluted,—these do not comprehend the
Sanskrit language—the wise one should say simply ‘I salute thee,’ thus
omitting only the mention of his name, which forms one part of the full
injunction. If the persons thus accosted should fail to understand even
this much, then they should be saluted even with corrupt vernacular
forms of words; it is in view of this that the text has added the
epithet ‘*wise*’; *i.e*., when one realises the difficulty of the other
person’s understanding, he should find out some such form of greeting as
might suit each particular case, and he should not stick to the precise
form enjoined in the preceding verse.

‘*Similarly to all women*’; the term ‘all’ implies that the same applies
even to the wives of teachers,—even though they be capable of
understanding Sanskrit words.

Some people have explained that one should pronounce his name only when
it so happens that he is known among people by a pseudonym—some such as
‘*Vanamālīvarṇaḥ*,’—so that the real name given to him by his father is
not known, and what is known is not his real name.

Others have explained the verse to refer to those who do not know the
correct form of answering the salutation; for instance, Pāṇini (8.2.83)
has laid down that the vowel at the end of the name pronounced in
answering a salutation should he pronounced ultra-long; and to those who
do not know this, the wise one should simply say ‘I.’ The author of the
*Mahābhāṣya* (Patañjali) also has said the same in course of his
explanation of the uses of the Science of Grammar—“Ignorant people who
do not know that in answering a salutation, the name should be
pronounced with an ultra-long vowel,—to such persons one may freely say
simply ‘I,’ just as to women.” These writers have said that the term
‘*abhivāda*,’ ‘salutation,’ in the present verse has got to be taken in
the sense of ‘answering a salutation,’ specially on account of what has
been said in other *Smṛtis*. If the present verse is not explained on
these lines, then, the prohibition of salutation, occurring in verse 126
below would come to be taken as prohibiting the saluting of all
unlearned persons; and this would be contrary to what other Smṛti-rules
have laid down regarding the use of the simple form ‘it is I’ (in the
saluting of unlearned persons). If, on the other hand, we adopt the
explanation as here suggested, then the said prohibition (occurring in
1.20) might be taken as purely commendatory, and not mandatory; and this
would be quite consistent with the present explanation.—(123)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 501) as laying down the
method of salutation also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 451), where
the following observations are made:—

‘In the case of such illiterate men as do not comprehend the salutation
addressed to them in the form of the Sanskrit sentence declaring the
name of the saluter,—*i. e*. who do not understand that they are being
saluted,—as also in the case of all women, literate and illiterate,—one
should not omit his own name, and say simply, ‘I salute you and if even
this much is not understood, then the salutation may be made even with
corrupt vernacular words;—such is the implication of the term
‘*prājña*,’ *wise*. The ancients have defined ‘*abhivādana* ‘salutation’
as *obeisance with the prescribed formula*.

There is a difference among—

1.  *Pādopasaṃgrahaṇa* (clasping the feet),
2.  ‘*Abhivādana*’ (salutation)
3.  and ‘*Namaskāra*’ (bowing);

—the (1) being reserved for Teachers and Elders, (2) for people very
much older than the saluter, and (3) for those only slightly older; so
says Harihara; and *Kalpataru* also mentions ‘*abhivādana*’ and
‘*Pādopasaṃgrahaṇa*’ separately; Manu himself mentions the two
separately in verse 216 below.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 54) as laying down that the
saluting of illiterate persons is to be done in the same form as that of
women;—also in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 98), which adds the
explanation:—‘To persons not conversant with the proper way of returning
the salute along with the name of the saluter,—as also to all women—the
salutation is to be offered only with the words ‘*aham bhoḥ*,’ ‘*it is*
*I*, *sir*!’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (13.1.1).—‘*Here I am*—he should say only this much,
when saluting a person who is not learned enough to know the proper form
of returning the salutation.’

*Āpastamba* (Aparārka, p. 54).—‘Elderly ladies one shall salute with
bowing the head; all ladies are to be saluted with one’s name; not so
one’s mother or the wives of Elders—say some.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

123	To those (persons) who, when a name is pronounced, do not understand (the meaning of) the salutation, a wise man should say, 'It is I;' and (he should address) in the same manner all women.
</details>
