+++
title = "124 भोःशब्दङ् कीर्तयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In saluting, one should pronounce the term “Oh, Sir” at the end op his own name; since it has been declared by the sages that the form “Oh, Sir” represents the form of all names.—(124)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्वस्य नाम्नो ऽन्ते भोःशब्दं कीर्तयेत्** । स्वग्रहणम् अभिवाद्यमानप्रतिषेधार्थम् । परिशिष्टो ऽर्थवादः । न च नामाक्षराणाम् एवान्ते ऽपि तु ततः परेषाम् "अहम् अस्मि" इति । एष हि तत्रेतिकरणं प्रयोगावधारणार्थम् । एवम् एव प्रयोक्तव्यः । अपि च "देवदत्तो भो अहम्" इति दुःशिष्टे प्रयोगे विलम्बितायां प्रतिपत्तौ संमुखीभावश् चिरेण स्यात् तत्र कार्यविरोधः । व्यवहितसंबन्धे कश्चिन् नैवावधानवान् स्यात् ।

- **स्वरूपभावः** स्वरूपस्य सत्ता । अथ वाभिवाद्य**नाम्नां** स्वरूपे भवति, तत्स्थाने भवत्य् अतस् तन्नामनिवृत्तिः । भावसाधनः कर्तृसाधनो वा भावशब्दः । **स्वरूपभाव** इति सप्तम्यन्तो वा पठितव्यः । **भोभावः**[^३५६] । भो इत्य् एतस्य यद् भवनं यत् स्वरूपं तन् **नाम्नां** स्वरूपम् । यथैव नाम गृहीत्वा कस्यचित् संबोधनं क्रियते "देवदत्त श्रूयताम्" इति, एवं भोःशब्दो ऽप्य् आमन्त्रितविभक्त्यन्तः संबोधनायैवं **ऋषिभिः** स्मर्यते ॥ २.१२४ ॥


[^३५६]:
     J: bhāvaḥ (omits bho)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*At the end of his own name one should pronounce the term Oh, Sir*.’The
epithet ‘*own*’ has been added with a view to precluding the possibility
of the name of the saluted person being understood to be meant.

The rest of the verse is purely valedictory.

The term should be pronounced, immediately after the letters of the
name, but after some, other letters also, such as the expression ‘I am’
(as laid down in verse, 122, above). The presence of the particle
‘*iti*’ (in verse 122, after ‘*ahamasmi*’) is meant to define the actual
form of the expression to be used; the sense being that such is the
actual form of the expression to be used; Further, if the expression
were wrongly used iu the form ‘Devadatta, Oh, Sir, I am,’ the
comprehension of its meaning (by the accosted person) would be delayed,
and this would still further delay the inviting of his attention; and
this would defeat the purpose of the salutation. And it may also happen
that when the expression used is one not amenable to simple
construction, the other party does not comprehend it at all.

‘*Form*’—the existence of very essence. Or, it may mean that it comes in
lieu of the name of the accosted person; *i.e*., comes in place of the
name; and the name of the accosted person is. not pronounced. The term
‘*bhāta*’ may mean either that which is accomplished by means of
existence, or that which is accomplished by means of an agent.

Or, we may read ‘*svarūpabhāve*,’ with the locative ending.

‘*The form, Oh, Sir*’;—*i.e*., the presence, the existence, of the
term‘Oh, Sir’—‘*is, the form of* *all* *names*.’ Just as one is
addressed by having his name uttered—‘Oh, Devadatta, listen to me,’
similarly the term *bhoḥ*’ (Oh, Sir)—which ends in the Vocative
case-ending—is used for the purposes of address; this has been so
declared by the sages.—(124)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 26) with the following
notes:—The term ‘*bhoḥ*’ is the ‘*marūpabhāva*’ of names; *i.e*. it
leads the name uttered to reach the person addressed; the sense being
that when addressed with the term ‘*bhoḥ*’, the person catches the
saluter’s name. The root in the term ‘*bhāva*’ denotes *reaching*. If we
read ‘*bhobhāvaḥ*’ this would mean ‘the *bhāva*, or presence, of the
term *bhoḥ*:

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 450) where we have the
following notes:—At the end of the name pronounced in the salutation,
one should utter the term ‘*bhoḥ*’ for attracting the attention of the
person saluted; because it has been declared by the sages that the term
‘*bhoḥ*’ stands for the names of the persons addressed; so that, even
though the name of the saluted person be not uttered, the term ‘*bhoḥ*’
becomes the proper form of address. Thus then the formula for saluting
comes to be ‘*abhivādaye amukanāma ahamasmi bhoḥ*.’

This is quoted also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 191);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 45), which states the complete formula as ‘*Ābhivādaye Devadatto’ham
bho*’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 96).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (28.17.)—‘In salutation, he should pronounce his own name
and at the end the word *bhoḥ*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

124	In saluting he should pronounce after his name the word bhoh; for the sages have declared that the nature of bhoh is the same as that of (all proper) names.
</details>
