+++
title = "133 पितुर् भगिन्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Towards his father’s sister, his mother’s sister, and his own elder sister, one should adopt the same behaviour as towards his mother; but the mother is more venerable than these.—(133)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पितुश्** च या **भगिनी मातुश् च** या **भगिनी** तस्याम्, **स्वसरि** चात्मीयायां ज्येष्ठायां भगिन्यां **मातृवद् वृत्तिर्** अतिदिश्यते ।

- <u>ननु</u> च मातृष्वसुः पितृष्वसुश् चायम् उक्त एव धर्मो "मातृष्वसा मातुलानी" (म्ध् २.१३१) इत्य् अत्र । <u>अथोच्यते</u> । तत्र गुरुपत्नीवद् इत्य् उक्तम् । इह तु मातृवद् वृत्तिर् इत्य् उच्यत इति । नैष भेदः । तुल्या हि गुरुपत्न्यां मातरि च वृत्तिः । 

- **केचिद्** आहुः **माता ताभ्यो गरीयसीत्य्** एतद् वक्तुम् अनूद्यते भगिन्योः पितुर् मातुश् च गरीयस्त्वम् । यदा माताज्ञां ददाति स्वस्रादयश् च तदा मातुर् आज्ञा क्रियते न तासाम् । न चैतद् वाच्यम् एतद् अपि सिद्धम् "माता गौरवेणातिरिच्यते" (म्ध् २.१४५) इति, अर्थवादत्त्वात् तस्य ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु गुरुपत्न्या मातुश् च वृत्तिभेदं मन्यन्ते । गुरुपत्न्याः पूर्वाज्ञाद्यावश्यकम् । मातुश् तु शैशवात् वाल्लभ्येनान्यथात्वम्[^३६५] अपि । लालनात् तत्रोभयापदेशान् मातृष्वसुः पितृष्वसुश् च व्यवस्था । शैशवे लालनं तुल्यम् एव स्वस्यां स्वसरि । अतीतशैशवस्य तु गुरुपत्नीवत् संपूज्यत्वम् इति । न चानेनैवैतत् सिध्यति । असति हि वाक्यद्वये मातृवद् वृत्तिर् इत्य् एतावता प्राकरणिकी अभिवादननिवृत्तिर् एव विज्ञायेत ॥ २.१३३ ॥


[^३६५]:
     M G: vātsalyenānyathātvam

_अथ पुनः स्नेहवृत्तिर् अतिदिश्यते_ ।[^३६६]
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present text serves to indicate the propriety of behaving, as
towards one’s mother, towards the sister of his father, and the sister
of his mother, and also towards bis own elder sister.

*Objection*.—“The treatment to be accorded towards the father’s and the
mother’s sister has already been prescribed under 131 above. It might be
argued that in verse 131 it is said that they should be treated like the
*Teacher’s wife*, while in the present verse they are described as to be
treated like one’s *mother*. But this makes no difference; as the
behaviour towards the mother is precisely the same as that towards the
Teacher’s wife.”

To this some people make the following answer: The venerable character
of the father’s and the mother’s sister has been re-asserted only for
the purpose of adding that ‘*the mother is more venerable than these*.’
The meaning is that when one’s mother directs him one way, and the
father’s sister and the rest another way, he should act according to the
directions of his mother, and not according to those of the others. It
will not be right to argue that this (superiority of the mother) is also
already declared under verse 145; because this latter verse is purely
valedictory.

Others however hold that, there is some difference in the treatment to
be accorded to the mother and to the Teacher’s wife. In the case of the
Teacher’s wife, worship, etc., are necessary; while in the case of the
mother, it is often otherwise also, because of the son being too young,
or because of the mother being too fond of him. And since the father’s
sister and the mother’s sister also fondle the child (like his mother),
it is only natural that these should be treated like the mother.
Fondling during childhood is done by one’s own older sister also. But
when one has passed beyond childhood, his treatment of these relatives
should be like that of his teacher’s wife. All this is not got out of
the present verse only. And if we did not have both declarations (one in
the present verse, and Another in 131), then the mere assertion of
‘behaviour as towards his mother’ would be liable to be understood as
referring to salutation only, as it is this that forms the
subject-matter of the context; while as a matter of fact, it is the
*loving behaviour* that is here intended to be accorded.—(133)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra p. 459) in support of
the view that the ladies herein mentioned should be accosted by the
clasping of the feet, as they are here declared to be treated ‘like the
mother’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 90).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (32.3).—‘Mother’s sister, father’s sister, and the elder
sister also.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

133	Towards a sister of one's father and of one's mother, and towards one's own elder sister, one must behave as towards one's mother; (but) the mother is more venerable than they.
</details>
