+++
title = "134 दशाब्दाख्यम् पौरसख्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among citizens friendship and equality are regarded as ranging within ten years (of age-difference); among artists, it is regarded as ranging within five years; among learned men, it proceeds up to three years; and among blood-relations, it ranges only within a very short period of time.—(134)


ṛtvikśvaśurapitṛ?yamātulānāṃ tu yaviyasāṃ pratyutthānābhibhāṣaṇam.
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं पूर्वम् "प्राणा ह्य् उत्क्रामन्ति यूनः स्थविर आयति" (म्ध् २.१२०) इति । तत्र कियद्भिर् वर्षैः स्थाविर्यं भवति । लोके हि शिरःपालित्ये स्थविरव्यवहारः, तन्निरूपणार्थम् इदम् । 

- दशभिर् वर्षैर् जन्मनो ऽधिकैर् अपि **पौराणां सख्यम्** आख्यायते । तेन दशवर्षाधिको ज्येष्ठो भवति, अपि तु मित्रवद् व्यवहर्तव्यः । यथोक्तं भो भवन्न् इति वयस्येति । दशभ्यो वर्षेभ्य ऊर्ध्वं ज्येष्ठः । आख्यानम् **आख्या** । **दशाब्दा आख्या** यस्य सक्यस्य । त्रिपदो बहुव्रीहिः । आख्यानिमित्तत्वाद् वर्षाणां सामानाधिकरण्यम्, निमित्तनिमित्तिनोर् भेदस्याविवक्षितत्वात् । एतावांश् च समासान्तर्भूतो ऽर्थः- यः पूर्वजो दशवर्षाणां यावत् स सखैव भवति । 

- पुरे भवाः **पौराः** तेषाम् । पुरग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम्, ग्रामवासिनाम् अप्य् एष एव न्यायः । ये केचिद् एकस्मिन् ग्रामे वसन्ति[^३६७] तावद् यस्मिन्[^३६८] परस्परप्रत्यासत्तिहेतुर् विद्यते ते सखायः । 


[^३६८]:
     M G: tān yaḥ kaścit


[^३६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: santi

- ये तु **कलां** कांचन **बिभ्रति** शिल्पगीतवाद्यादिकां तेषां पञ्चवर्षाणि यो ऽधिकः स सखा, तत ऊर्ध्वं ज्येष्ठः । त्रयो ऽब्दाः पूर्वे यस्य तच् **छ्रोतियाणां** सख्यम् ।

- **अल्पेनापि** कालेन **स्वयोनिष्व्** एकवंश्येषु कतिचिद् अहानि यो ऽधिकः स ज्येष्ठः । कियान् पुनः **स्वल्पकालः** । न तावद् अब्दः । **त्र्यब्दपूर्वम्** इति निर्दिश्याल्पेनेत्य् उच्यमानस् ततो न्यूनः प्रतीयते । एकवचननिर्देशाच् च न वर्षद्वयम् । नाप्य् एको ऽब्दः, **स्वल्पेनेति** वेशेषणानुपपत्तेः । परिच्छिन्नपरिमाणो ह्य् अब्दवाच्यो ऽर्थस् तस्याहोरात्रमात्रेण न्यूनस्य नाब्दत्वम् अस्ति । तस्माद् अल्पेनेति कालसामान्यम् अपेक्षते । संवत्सराद् अवरश् च तस्य विशेषः । **अपि**शब्दश् चैव शब्दस्यार्थे द्रष्टव्यः । अल्पेनैव कालेन सख्यम्, बहुना तु ज्येष्ठत्वम् एव । एतच् च समानगुणानां समानजातीयानां च द्रष्टव्यम् । एतेन लौकिकं स्थविरलक्षणं निवर्तितसापेक्षिकम् आश्रितम् ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु व्यचक्षते । नानेन स्थविरत्वं लक्ष्यते, किं तर्हि सखित्वम् एव । यथाश्रुतत्यागेन स्थविरलक्षणं स्यत्, "इयता कालेन सखा परतस् तु ज्येष्ठः" इति । अयं च श्लोकार्थः । एकत्र पुरे वसन्ति दशवर्षाणि यावत् तानि मित्राणि । कलाश् चतुःषष्टिस् तद्विदां संगत्या पञ्चभिर् वर्षैः । **स्वयोनिषु स्वल्पेनापि** च कालेन सह वसतां मित्रत्वम् एव । अतश् च सर्वो वयसा तुल्यो वयस्यः, किं तर्हि एतद् एव । समानवयस्त्वे चैतल्लक्षणम्[^३६९] । 


[^३६९]:
     M -tvaivaillakṣaṇam; G 1st ed.: tve vaitallakṣaṇam

- युक्तम् एतत् । किं तूत्तरश्लोको विरुध्यते । तत्र हि जातेः प्राधान्यम्, न वयसः । यदि चात्रेयता कालेन ज्यैष्ठ्यम् उक्तं भवति तदा विजातीयानाम् अप्य् आशङ्क्यमानं न निवर्त्यत इति युक्तम् । पूर्वे च व्याख्यातार आद्यम् एव व्याख्यानं मन्यन्ते ॥ २.१३४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above (under 120) that ‘the life-breaths of the younger
men rush outwards at the approach of the elder now the present verse
proceeds to determine by bow many years one may be regarded as an
‘elder’; among ordinary men people come to be regarded as ‘elderly’ when
they become grey-headed.

Among citizens, equality and friendship are regarded as subsisting among
people who differ in their age by ten years, so that among these, one
conies to be regarded as ‘elder’ when he happens to be more than ten
years older; and those less than that should be treated as ‘friends and
equals’; and hence accosted as ‘Oh, Sir,’ as declared by Gautama
(6.14)—“Equals in age should be accosted as ‘Oh, Sir’; when the
difference in age is more than ten years, the person should be regarded
as ‘elder.’

In the expression ‘*daśābdākhya*,’ ‘*ākhyā*’ stands for ‘*ākhyānam*,’
‘*description*’; and the compound, a three-termed *Bahuvrīhi*, means
‘that whose description is ten years’; the years being construed as
qualifying ‘friendship’ on the basis of ‘description,’ and no
significance being attached to the difference between cause and effect
(the ‘years’ being the cause of the ‘friendship’), all that the compound
means is that—‘one who is senior by about ten years is an equal friend.’

‘*Pauras*,’ ‘*citizens*,’ are ‘persons living in cities.’ The mention of
‘cities’ is only by way of illustration; the same rule holds good among
inhabitants of villages also. Among people living in the same village,
all those come to be regarded as ‘friends’ among whom there happens to
be some ground for close intimacy.

Those persons who practise some sort of *art*—crafts, music and the
rest,—among these one who is older by less than five years is an
‘equal’; beyond that, he is ‘elder.’

‘*Tryabdam*’ means ‘that which is preceded by three years’; and of this
kind is the ‘equality’ among learned men.

‘*Among blood-relations, it ranges within a very short period of
time*’;—*i.e*., among persons belonging to the same family, he who is
senior by only a few days is also ‘elder.’

“What period of time is to be regarded as *very short*?”

It cannot he *three years*; for having spoken of three ‘*years*,’ the
text mentions ‘short,’ which means that it must be less than that. It
cannot mean *two* years, because of the singular number. Nor lastly, can
it mean *one* year, as in that case there would be no point in the
qualification ‘*very short*.’ Because ‘year’ is the name given to a
well-defined period of time; so that a period of time which is less than
that even by a single day ceases to be a ‘year.’ For these reasons
‘*short*’ must refer to time in general (unspecified), the only
peculiarity being tbat it, should be less than a year.

The particle ‘*ca*’ should be taken as standing for ‘*?va*,’ ‘*only*’;
the meaning being ‘*friendship* ranges only within a very short period
of time, beyond that the man becomes *elder*.’ All this should be taken
as holding good only among people of the same caste, possessed of
similar qualifications; so that the definition of ‘elder’ as something
relative in sense is that obtaining among ordinary people.

Other persons explain the verso as follows:—This verse does not define
what is tho characteristic of being ‘elder’; it only serves to define
‘Friendship.’ It could be taken as defining ‘elderliness’ only if we
abandoned its direct meaning; as only then could it be taken to mean
that ‘during such time one is a friend, and after that he becomes an
*elder*.’ As a matter of fact, what the verse means is as follows:—(*a*)
People who live in the same city for ten years become ‘friends’; (*b*)
among people knowing the arts—sixty-four in number—companionship during
five years establishes ‘friendship’; (*c*) among blood-relations,
friendship is established by living together even for a very short time.
Thus then, one does not become a ‘friend’ simply because he happens to
be of equal age, in fact the ‘friend’ is as described; but the said
conditions of ‘friendship’ all require tbat the parties concerned be of
equal age.

All this may be true; but this explanation is inconsistent with the next
verse; in the latter, ‘caste’ is mentioned as the pre-eminent factor,
and not the age; and the reason is that if the mere fact of being so
many years older in age were to make one ‘elder,’ then we could not get
rid of the contingency of persons of different (and inferior) castes
being regarded as ‘elders.’

Older commentators have all adopted the first explanation (put forward
by us).—(134)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Those who are ‘friends’ and equals may address each other with the
words ‘*bhoḥ*’, ‘*bhavat*,’ or ‘*vayasya*’, ‘friend’. The explanation of
the verse, which is substantially the same in all the commentaries, is
based on Gautama’s passage (6.14-17); while Haradatta’s interpretation
of Āpastamba (1.4.13) somewhat differs.”—(Buhler).

“A small difference in age constitutes among relatives a difference in
position; but in other cases only a considerable difference as
specified.—This ‘equality’ refers to the form of salutation among
equals.”—(Burnell—Hopkins).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 466), where the
following explanation is given:—Among persons living in the same city,
and not possessed of any exceptional learning or wealth or other
qualifications, if the difference in the age of two persons extends to
within ten years, they are to treat each other as ‘friends,’ and there
is to be no salutation; the ‘city’ here includes the village also;—among
persons versed in music and other arts, equality extends to within five
years of difference in age;—and among those learned in the Veda to
within *one* (as read here) year;—and among *Sapiṇḍas*, to within a very
short period of time. In every case there is ‘superority’ if the
difference exceeds the periods mentioned.

It is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 299), where also we
have the following explanation Among inhabitants of the same village one
is to be treated as ‘friend’ if he is older by less than ten years;
beyond that he is to be treated as ‘superior’.—Among men expert in the
arts and in learning, there is equality if there is a difference of five
years;—among persons learned in the Veda, or students of the Veda, there
is equality if there is a difference of *three* years, after which the
older man becomes ‘superior’;—among blood relations, brothers and the
rest, the older person is to be treated as an equal only when the
difference in age is very small.

*Parāśaramādhava* raises the question of saluting such *Ṛtvik* and
others as are younger in age. In view of the general rule that these
should be saluted, the fact of any one being younger in age does not
deprive him of his right to a salute. The conclusion however is that all
that is meant is that they have to be ‘treated with respect’; and this
implies that one should stand up to receive and welcome them with
agreeable words, as is clearly laid down by Baudhāyana, who says,

> ṛtvikśvaśurapitṛ?yamātulānāṃ tu yaviyasāṃ pratyutthānābhibhāṣaṇam.

That these are not to he saluted is clearly asserted by Gautama (6.9),
which lays down that these are anabhivāthāḥ (?), It is interesting to
note that in quoting Gautama, Mādhava has read *abhivādanam* in place of
*anabhivādyāḥ*; but knowing somehow that the meaning of Gautama was that
these are *not* *abhivādyāḥ*, he has explained *abhivādanam* as
*abhibhāṣaṇam*, *speech*.

The verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 29) as declaring the
difference in age which constitutes ‘superiority’. It practically
repeats the explanation given in *Parāśaramādhava* (see above); but at
the end adds that among blood-relations, the difference of even one day
establishes superiority; while between relations born on the same day
there is equality as declared by Āpastamba.—‘One born on the same day is
a *friend*.’

*Aparārka* (p. 53) quotes this verse and adds the following
explanation:—Among citizens even one who is ten years older is a ‘friend
and it is only one who is more than ten years older is to be regarded as
an ‘elder’; among musicians and other artists one older by five years or
less is a ‘friend’, older than that he becomes an ‘elder’; among Vedic
scholars, it is upto three years; and among these latter, superority or
inferiority is determined by special qualifications.—-The particle
‘*api*’ means ‘*eva*’.

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 101), which offers the
following explanation:—Among citizens, one who is senior by one to ten
years is to be regarded as a ‘friend’—an equal; one older than that is
an ‘elder’—a superior;—among artists people versed in singing, dancing
and so forth there is ‘friendship’ upto a difference of five years;
among Vedic scholars it extends to a difference of three years; older
than that, is ‘elder’—superior; among blood-relations there is
‘friendship’ within a limit of very few years; one even a little older
is to be saluted like an ‘elder’;—all this refers to Brāhmaṇas.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.24.13).—‘Friendship (equality) among citizens
extends up to ten years; among members of the same Vedic sect, up to
five years and the elder Vedic scholar deserves salutation if he is
senior by three years.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (6.2.5).—‘One born on the same day as oneself is
his *friend*; a citizen who is senior by ten years; an artisan, who is
senior by five years; a Vedic scholar of the same Vedic sect, who is
senior by three years.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

134	Fellow-citizens are called friends (and equals though one be) ten years (older than the other), men practising (the same) fine art (though one be) five years (older than the other), Srotriyas (though) three years (intervene between their ages), but blood-relations only (if the) difference of age be very small.
</details>
