+++
title = "136 वित्तम् बन्धुर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Wealth, Relation, Age, Action and Learning, as the fifth,—these are the grounds of respect; (among them) that which follows is weightier (than that which goes before it).—(136)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं जातेर् उत्कर्षहेतुत्वम् । हीनजातीयेनोत्तमजातीयः पूज्यः । इदानीं समानजातीयानां य अभिवादनादिपूजाहेतवस् तेषां बलाबलम् उच्यते । तत्र **वयसः** पुनर् अभिधानं बलाबलर्थम् । **वित्ता**दिसंबन्धो ऽत्र सर्वत्र पूजाहेतुः । **वित्त**वत्त्वं **बन्धु**मत्त्वं **मानस्थानम्** इति । अयम् अत्रार्थः । न[^३७०] विशिष्टबन्धुतैव[^३७१] पितृव्यमातुलादिरूपता मानकारणं बन्धुमान्यो बहुबन्धुः स पूज्यः । **वयः** प्रकृष्टम् इति ज्ञेयम् । ईदृश एव चार्थे प्रायेणायं प्रयुज्यते । 


[^३७१]:
     M G 1st ed.: viśiṣṭatā bandhutaiva


[^३७०]:
     M omits: na

- पित्रा पुत्रो वयःस्थो ऽपि सततं वाच्य एव सः । इति ।

यावच् च वयः पूजाहेतुः तद् उक्तम् एव "दशाब्दाख्यम्" (म्ध् २.१३४) इति । **कर्म** श्रौतं स्मार्थं तदनुष्ठानपरता । **विद्या** साङ्गसोपकरणवेदार्थज्ञानम्[^३७२] ।


[^३७२]:
     M G: sāntā sopakaraṇa-

- <u>ननु</u> विद्वान् यजते विद्वान् याजयतीत्य् अविद्यस्य कर्मानुष्ठानानधिकारात्, विद्यया विना कथं कर्मणां मानहेतुता । <u>नैष दोषः</u> । पकर्षो ऽत्राभिप्रेतः । अतिशयवती विद्या मानहेतुः । स्वल्पविद्यस्याप्य् अनुष्ठानोपपत्तिः । यो यावज् जानाति स तवत्य् अधिक्रियते । न विद्याया वाचनिकम् अधिकारहेतुत्वम् अपि तु सामर्थ्यलक्षणम् । अविदितकर्मस्वरूपो ह्य् अवैद्यस् तिर्यक्कर्मा क्वाधिक्रियताम् । शक्यं ह्य् अनेन कतिचित्स्मृतिवाक्यान्य् उपश्रुत्य जपतपस्यम् अनुष्ठातुम् । अग्निहोत्रादिकर्मणां तु वेदवाक्यावबोध उपकरोति । तत्रापि यो यावज् जानाति स तावत्य् अधिक्रियते । अग्निहोत्रवाक्यानां यो ऽर्थं वेत्ति स तत्राधिक्रियते । क्रत्वन्तरज्ञानं न तत्रोपकारकम् । 

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । "वेदः कृत्स्नो ऽधिगन्तव्यः" (म्ध् २.१६५) इति कृत्स्नवेदविषयो ऽयं विधिर् अवबोधपर्यन्तः । तत्र कृत्स्नस्य वेदस्यावबोधे कर्तव्ये कुतो ऽयं प्रतिभागावबोधसंभवः, येनोच्यते "यो ऽग्निहोत्रवाक्यस्यार्थं वेत्ति वाक्यान्तरार्थम् अविद्वान् अप्य् अधिक्रियते" इति । <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । एकशाखाध्ययनं तावद् अवश्यं कर्तव्यम् । तत्र येनैकशाखाधीता तस्याश् चार्थो ऽवधृतः, सो ऽनवधृतशाखान्तरार्थो ऽधिक्रियते ।

- <u>ननु</u> च सर्वत्रैक एव शास्त्रार्थः । यदि नाम पदवर्णानुपूर्वीभेदः, शास्त्ररूपं त्व् अभिन्नम्[^३७३] । पदार्थन्यायव्युत्पत्त्या वावबोधः । न च प्रतिशाखं पदार्था भिद्यन्ते[^३७४] । नापि न्यायः । तत्र येनैव हेतुनैकस्याः शाखाया अर्थो ऽवधर्यते शाखान्तरे ऽप्य् असाव् अस्ति, न व्युत्पत्त्यन्तरम् अपेक्षते । तत्र यद्य् एका शाखावगता, सर्वा एवावगता भवन्ति ।


[^३७४]:
     G 1st ed.: vidyante (probably a typo)


[^३७३]:
     M G 1st ed.: śāstrarūpatvaṃ bhinnaṃ

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । यान्य् एकस्याम् अग्निहोत्रादीन्य् उपदिष्टानि तेषां शाखान्तरे ऽप्य् उपदिश्यमानानां मा भूद् भेदः[^३७५] । किं तु कस्यांचिच् छाखायां कानिचित् कर्माणि नैवोपदिश्यन्ते । यथा बाह्वृचे आश्वलायनके दर्शपूर्णमासौ श्येनादिर् आभिचारकः[^३७६], अन्ये च सोमयागवाजपेयबृहस्पतिसवादयः । तत्र यत् तच्छाखाधीनम् अग्निहोत्रज्योतिष्टोमादि तत्राधिक्रियते । शाखान्तरं त्व् अनधीतम् अश्रुतं कथं तद्विहितानि[^३७७] कर्माण्य् तच्छाखाध्यायी वेत्तु । न चैते सोमयागा नित्या, येनाननुष्ठानप्रत्यवायभयात् परिज्ञानाय शाखान्तरम् अन्विष्यते । आधानं तु यद्य् अपि तत्र न पठितं तत्राप्य् "उद्धराहवनीयम्" (ऐत्ब् ५.२६; आश्श् २.२.१) इत्य् आहवनीयस्य विधानम् । लोकात् तदर्थम् अनवबुध्यमानः को ऽयम् आहवनीयो यस्याधानम् इति शाखान्तरम् अन्विष्यति । ततः शाखान्तरे पठ्यमानम् आधानप्रकरणं सर्वं पर्यालोचयति । एवम् आमावास्येन वा हविषेष्ट्वा पौर्णमासेन वेति श्रुत्वा कीदृशम् अनयोः कर्मणो रूपम् इति तथैव शाखान्तरं गवेषयते । एवम् अन्यद् अपि यत् काम्यं नित्यं चानुष्ठेयं तस्य यत् किंचिद् अङ्गजातं तत्र नाम्नातम् आध्वर्यवम् औद्गात्रं वा तत् परिज्ञाय तथैव शाखान्तराधिगमः[^३७८] । यत् तु शाखान्तराधीतम् अनुष्ठेयं तस्य न वेदनसंभवः । अनेकशाखाध्यायिनस् तु तदर्थपरस्य सर्वम् एतत् प्रत्यक्षम् इति । अस्तीदृशीं विद्याम् अन्तरेणापि कर्मानुष्ठानम् । अथ वा ईषद्व्युत्पत्त्यापि संभवत्य् अनुष्ठानं । 


[^३७८]:
     M G: śākhāntarad bhidyate


[^३७७]:
     M G 1st ed.: tadviditāni


[^३७६]:
     M G: śyenādir eṣa evābhicārakaḥ


[^३७५]:
     M G 1st ed.: upadiśyamānānāmabhūdbhedaḥ

- यस्य तु निर्मला विद्या, व्याख्येयानि विद्यास्थानानि, तस्य विद्या मान्यतास्थानम्[^३७९] । गरीय इति द्वयोर् द्वयोः संप्रधारणे ऽयम् ईयसुन्प्रत्ययः । चतुर्दशविद्यास्थनज्ञः पङ्ग्वन्धनिर्धनादिर् अनधिकृतो ऽपि विद्ययैव पूज्यते । 


[^३७९]:
     M G 1st ed.: vidyā mānyatatsthānam

- तेषां विरोधे बलाबलम् आह- **गरीयो यद् यद् उत्तरम्** । एकस्य वित्तम् अन्यस्य बहुबन्धुता, तत्र वित्तवतो बन्धुमान् मान्यः । यस्माच् च यत् परं तत् तस्माद् गुरुतरम्[^३८०] । तथा बन्धोर् वयः ततः पूर्वस्माद् अपि वित्तात् तद् गुरु सिद्धम् । अत उपपन्नम् "श्रुतं तु सर्वेभ्यो गरीयस् तन्मूलत्वाद् धर्मस्य" इति गौतमवचनम् (ग्ध् ६.२१–२२) ।


[^३८०]:
     M G 1st ed.: tasmāttaraṃ guru

- <u>गरीय</u> इति कथं प्रकर्षप्रत्ययो यावता नैव पूर्वस्य गुरुत्वम् । यदि हि द्वे गुरुणी[^३८१] तत्रोत्तरीयस्य गरीयस्त्वम् अस्ति । तर्हि पूर्वापेक्षया वित्तस्य नास्तीति चेत्, <u>समुदाये</u> सामान्येन गुरुत्वे ऽपेक्षिते अपरस्य प्रकर्षविवक्षायां युज्यत ईयसून् । 


[^३८१]:
     M G 1st ed.: rūpiṇī

- **मानः** पूजा तस्य **स्थानं** कारणम् । "मान्यस्थानानि" इति वा पाठे ऽन्तर्भूतभावार्थो द्रष्टव्यः । "मान्यत्वस्थानानि" मान्यत्वकारणानि ॥ २.१३६ ॥

_एकैकगुणसंबन्धे परस्य ज्यायस्त्वम् उक्तम् । यत्रेदानीं द्वौ पूर्वाव् एकस्य भवतो ऽपरस्यैकः पर इति तत्र कथम् इत्य् अत आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Caste has been described as a ground of superiority; so that one
belonging to a higher caste should be respected by one of a lower caste.
The text now proceeds to describe the relative strength of those factors
that entitle persons of a caste to salutation and honour among
themselves.

*Age* is mentioned here again only for the purpose of indicating its
position as compared with others.

In the case of all that is mentioned here it is the connection of the
person with them that entitles him to respect. That is, *the possession
of wealth* and the *possession of relations* constitute titles of
respect. It is not meant that the peculiar relationship borne by the
man—such as that of being a paternal or a maternal uncle—constitutes the
title of respect; what is meant is that one who has many relations
deserves to be respected.

‘*Age*’—*i.e*., advanced age. The term is generally used in this
qualified sense ; *e. g*., in such passages as—‘Even though the son be
of age, he should be advised by his father.’ Verse 134 has already
explained what age entitles one to respect

‘*Action*’—such as is laid down in *Śrutis* and *Smṛtis*; *i. e*., one’s
assiduity in performing such actions.

‘*Learning*,’—the knowledge of the Veda along with the subsidiary
sciences and their auxiliaries.

*Objection*.—“In view of such declarations as ‘the learned man offers
sacrifices,’ ‘the learned man officiates at sacrifices,’ the unlearned
person can never be entitled to the performance of religious acts; under
the circumstances, how can mere ‘action,’ without ‘learning,’ be a
ground for respect?”

*Answer*.—There is no force in this objection. *Excellence* is what is
meant here. Superior or efficient learning is what constitutes a title
to respect; and as for the performance of actions, this can be done also
by men possessed of limited learning; for a man is entitled to perform
actions in accordance with the knowledge possessed by him: specially as
‘*learning*’ entitles a person to the performance of actions simply
because it serves to capacitate him for it, and not because it has been
declared to be a necessary condition.

“But the man devoid of learning cannot know the form of the action to be
performed, and being capable of acting only like lower animals, to the
performance of what could he be entitled?”

Even such a person can, on having heard a few Smṛti-texts, perform
austerities and repeat *mantras*. It is only in the performance of the
Agnihotra and such other Vedic rites that one requires the knowledge of
Vedic texts. But here also the title to perform the rites is dependent
upon the extent of knowledge possessed by the man; *e.g*., one who knows
the meaning of tho texts bearing upon the *Agnihotra* is entitled to its
performance; the knowledge of other sacrifices is of no use in that.

The following argument might be urged here—“We have the injunction ‘the
entire Veda should be studied,’ which pertains to the whole Veda, and
implies the thorough understanding of the whole; and when it is
necessary to understand the meaning of the entire Veda, how can there be
any such partial knowledge as could justify such an assertion as that
‘he who knows the meaning of the texts bearing on the Agnihotra shall be
entitled to the performance of that act, even though he be ignorant of
the meaning of other texts?’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—It is the study of one Vedic
Recension that is necessary; and what we mean is that he who has studied
one Recension and has fully understood its meaning, becomes entitled to
the performance of Vedic acts, even without studying the other
Recensions.

“The purpose of the Scripture is the same in all cases; even though
there may be some difference in the order of a few words and syllables,
yet the main feature of the Scripture remains the same. Then again, as
for the understanding of the meaning, this is obtained by the due
comprehension of the meanings of words and reasonings; now, neither the
meanings of words, nor the reasonings, differ in the different
Recensions. So that the means by which one learns the meaning of one
Recension serves the same purpose in regard to the other Recensions
also; and one does not stand in need of any other learning; so that if
One Recension has been learnt, all become learnt.”

True. Such Agnihotra, etc., as are enjoined in one Recension may not
differ from the same acts as enjoined in other Recensions; but there are
certain actions which are not enjoined at all in certain Recensions.
*E.g*., the *Śyena* and other malevolent rites in connection with the
Darśa-pūrṇamāsa are not found in the Aśvalāyana Recension of the Ṛgveda;
nor the Somayāga, the Vājapeva, the Bṛhaspatisava and so forth. So that
when a man has learnt one Recension, he becomes entitled to that
Agnihotra and that Jyotiṣṭoma, etc., which are enjoined iu that
Recension_(;) and if one who has not studied another Recension, and has
neither read nor heard of it, how can he know anything about the acts
enjoined in that other Recension? Nor ore the Soma-sacrifices
compulsory; so that, through fear of incurring the sin of omitting a
compulsory act, one might be forced to seek for the knowledge of them
from other Recensions. As for the ‘Kindling of Fire,’ even though this
also is not found enjoined in the said Āśvalāyana recension of the
Ṛgveda, yet it does contain the injunction of preparing the ‘Āhavanīya’
fire; as is clear from such passages as ‘bring up the Āhavanīya’; so
that, not understanding the meaning of this passage with the help of
ordinary people, the student naturally seeks, from other Recensions, for
the knowledge of what this ‘*Āhavanīya*’ is; and thus he comes to look
over the entire section of the other Recension dealing with the
‘Kindling of Fire.’ Similarly having heard the passage—‘Having offered
either the Amāvāsyā or the Paurṇamāsa libations, etc.,’ one seeks from
other Recensions for the knowledge of the exact form of the two acts (of
Amāvāsyā and Paurṇamāsa offerings). Similarly in the case of other
compulsory and optional acts that have to be performed, when it is found
that some of their details arc not laid down in a certain
Recension,—-such details, for instance, as pertain to the Adhvaryu (and
are mentioned in the Yajurveda) or to the *Udgātṛ* (and are mentioned in
the Sāma-Veda),—the requisite knowledge is sought for from those other
texts. It is not possible for one to know the act that is laid down in
Recensions other than the one studied by him. To the student who learns
several Recensions, and studies their meanings, all this becomes quite
clear. But even in the absence of such knowledge as this last, the
performance of acts is quite possible. Or, such performance could be
possible even on a slight understanding (of the Vedic texts).

The sense of all this is that in the case of one whose learning is
flawless, and who is fit to explain all sciences, such learning
constitutes a title to respect.

‘*Weightier*.’—The comparative ending indicates that the comparison is
between two and two out of the five mentioned. Thus one who is fully
versed in all the fourteeu sciences, is respected through his
‘*learning*,’ even though he he not entitled to it on account of being
lame, blind or poor.

The text points out the relative superiority of these, with a view to
cases where there may *i.e* a conflict among them.—

‘*Among these that which follow is weightier than that which precedes
it*.’ For instance, when one man has vast wealth, and the other has many
relations, then the latter deserves higher respect than the former; for
that which follows is ‘weightier’ than that which precedes it. Similarly
*Age* is weightier than *Relation*. And from this it follows that *Age*
is weightier still than *Wealth*. From all this it is clear that
‘Learning is superior to all, for all Dharma is based upon it,’ as has
been declared by Gautama (6-21—22).

*Objection*.—“Since the preceding factor is not *weighty*, how can we
have the comparative form ‘*weightier*’? It is only when there are two
*weighty* things that one can be called *weightier*; and since in the
present case is, *ex hypothesi*, in relation to something preceding
there can be no *weightiness* in ‘wealth,’ which is not preceded by any
thing else.”

What is meant is that the whole lot of five being ‘weighty’ in common,
the comparative ending is rightly used as showing that one is
*weightier* than the other.

‘*Māna*’ means *respect*; ‘*sthāna*’ means *ground, cause*.

If we adopt the reading ‘*Mānyasthānāni*,’ the term ‘*mānya*’ is to be
explained as having the force of the abstract noun; ‘*mānya*’ standing
for ‘*mānyatva*.’—(136)

It has just been declared that among persons each of whom possesses only
one of the qualifications mentioned, one possessing the latter is to be
regarded as superior to one possessing the former. Now the question
arises—between two persons, one of whom possesses two former
qualifications and the other possesses only one latter qualification,
who is to be treated as superior? The following verse answers this
question.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 474), where we
find the following notes:—‘*Vittam*’ stands for *wealth acquired by
lawful* means;—‘*bandhuḥ*’ for *uncles* and others;—‘*vayaḥ*’ for *older
age*;—‘*karma*’ for acts prescribed in the *Śruti* and
*Smṛti*;—‘*vidyā*’ for *true knowledge*;—these are ‘*mānyasthānāni*,’
*i.e. grounds of respectability*. (See note below on 137).

*Aparārka* (p. 159) quotes this verse in support of the view that a man,
though belonging to an inferior caste, deserves to be respected by
another of the superior caste, if the former happens to be possessed of
superior learning and other qualifications.—It is quoted in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 44b);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 106), which explains ‘*mānyasthānāni*’ as ‘grounds of respect, and
adds that ‘learning’ is the highest of these all.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu Smṛti* (32.16)—(words of Manu reproduced).

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (6.20).—‘Wealth, Relationship, Caste, Learning and
Age are objects of respect: the succeeding being superior to the
preceding; Vedic Learning is superior to all, Dharma being based upon
that.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (1.3.21).—‘Learning, Wealth, Age, Relationship and
Deeds are objects of respect; when all these are present, the preceding
has preference over the succeeding,’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.116).—‘By reason of Learning, Action, Age,
Relationship, etc., and Wealth, in order, does a man become respected.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

136	Wealth, kindred, age, (the due performance of) rites, and, fifthly, sacred learning are titles to respect; but each later-named (cause) is more weighty (than the preceding ones).
</details>
