+++
title = "137 पञ्चानान् त्रिषु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among the three (higher) castes, he, in whom there are present most op these five, and of high degree, deserves (greater) respect; as also the Śūdra who has reached the tenth stage (of life).—(137)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पञ्चानाम्** एतेषां मानस्थानानां[^३८२] यत्र **भूयांसि** बहून्य् असर्वाणि स मान्यः । तत्र परत्वम् नातीवादर्तव्यम्[^३८३] । एकस्य वित्तबन्धू द्वे अन्यो वृद्धवयाः । तत्र पूर्वे बाधके । सत्य् अपि बहुत्वे यदि न श्रेष्ठानि भवन्ति, एकं चैकस्यात्युत्कृष्टम्, तदा साम्यम् । न पुनः परबाधकत्वम् । गरीय एकापेक्षया चरितार्थत्वात्[^३८४] । यदि तु भूयांसि गुनवन्त्य् अत्युत्कृष्टानि तदा साम्ये ऽपि संख्यया परेषां, पूर्वाणि परैश् च समसंख्यानि, तदा न पूर्वतरतया[^३८५] बाध्यबाधकभावः । किं तर्हि सामान्यम् एव ।


[^३८५]:
     J: pūrvaparatayā


[^३८४]:
     J: variṣṭhatvāt


[^३८३]:
     M: paratvam ādartavyam; G 1st ed.: paratvam āhartavyam


[^३८२]:
     M G: mānyasthānānāṃ

- <u>ननु</u> च यत्र गुणवन्ति स्युः सो ऽत्र मानार्ह इत्य् अभिधानेन समसंख्यस्यापि पूर्वस्य बाधकत्वम् एव युक्तम् । <u>नैवम्</u> । तुल्यत्वे गुणानाम् एतस्य चरितार्थत्वात् । यथैको ऽपि विद्यावान् अपरो ऽपि, तयोर् यस्य गुणवती प्रकृष्टा विद्या स प्रशस्यते । एवं सर्वत्र ।

- **त्रिषु वर्णेषु** ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियवैश्येषु । यद्य् एते गुणा भूयांसः प्रकृष्टाश् च क्षत्रियस्यापि भवन्ति तदा हीनगुणेन ब्राह्मणेन जात्युत्कृष्टेनापि क्षत्रियः पूज्यः । एवं क्षत्रियेण वैश्यः । एवं त्रिभिर् अपि द्विजातिभिः **शूद्रो ऽपि दशमीम्** इतः । दशमी अन्त्यावस्थोच्यते । अत्यन्तवार्धकोपलक्षणम् एतत् । एवं च वित्तबन्धू शूद्रस्य न[^३८६] माने हेतू त्रैवर्णिकान् प्रति, दशमीग्रहणात् । कर्मविद्ये तु नैव तस्य संभवतो ऽनधिकारात् ।


[^३८६]:
     M G omit: na

- **भूयांसीत्य्** आधिक्यमात्रं विवक्षितं न बहुत्वसंख्यैव । तेन द्विविषयतापि सिद्धा भवति । न ह्य् अयं संख्यावाच्येव बहुशब्द इत्य् अत्र प्रमाणम् अस्ति । भूयःशब्दश् चायं न बहुशब्द आधिक्ये च तत्र तत्र दृष्टः प्रयोगः । "भूयांश् चात्र परिहारः," "भूयसाभ्य्दयेन योक्ष्ये" इति प्रत्ययार्थबहुत्वम् अपि न विवक्षितम् । "जात्याख्यायाम्" (पाण् १.२.५८) ह्य् एतद् बहुवचनम् । विवक्षायां हि एकस्य गुणवतो मानहेतुत्वं न स्यात् । ततश् च पूर्वो ऽवगतिर् बाध्यते[^३८७] । **शूद्रो ऽपि दशमीम्** इत्य् अत्र च केवलस्यैव वयसः प्रकर्षे मानहेतुत्वं ब्रुवन्न् अविवक्षां दर्शयति । समाचारश् चैवम् एव ॥ २.१३७ ॥


[^३८७]:
     J: bādhyeta
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Of these five*’ grounds of respect;—he in whom there are ‘*a* *larger
number*’—not all—‘*deserves respect*.’ And here the mere sequence (or
posteriority) of the qualifications should not be much heeded. For
instance, when one man possesses *wealth* and *relations*, and the other
possesses only *old age*,—the former gets preference over the latter.

But even when there are several qualities present, if they are not of
high degree,—while the single quality possessed by the other person is
of very high degree,—then both are equal; and the larger number do not
get over the latter (superior) qualification.

When the former verse uses the term ‘*weightier*,’ it only means
superiority in comparison to one (not several) of the preceding ones.

When however in one person there are a *larger number of preceding
qualities* and also *of high degree*,—of great excellence,—while in the
other person there are present the same number of *succeeding*
qualities,—so that the number of preceding and succeeding qualifications
(possessed by the two men) are equal,—then, there is no getting over the
one by the other, simply on the ground of precedence (in enumeration);
in this case both are to he regarded as equal.

“Since what the text declares is that he is deserving of respect in whom
the qualities are of high degree,—it would he right to conclude that in
the case just mentioned where the two persons possess an equal *number*
of qualities (hut the preceding ones are of higher degree), the presence
of the preceding set should get over the other.”

Not so; the epithet ‘*of high degree*’ is meant to apply to the case
where the two sets of qualities are equal; *e.g*., where the one as well
as the other is possessed of *learning*, superiority belongs to one
whose learning is of the superior order. Similarly with the other
qualities.

‘*Among the three Castes*,’—*i.e*., among Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and
Vaiśyas. If the said qualities, many in number and of high degree,
belong to the *Kṣatriya*, then such a Kṣatriya deserves to be respected
by the Brāhmaṇa possessed of inferior qualities, even though he belongs
to the higher caste. The Vaiśya, similarly, is to be respected by the
Kṣatriya.

Similarly by all the twice-born castes the *Śūdra* should be respected,
‘*when he has reached the tenth stage*.’ The ‘*tenth*’ stands for the
last stage of life, and indicates *extreme old age*. Thus then, in case
of the Śūdra, ‘wealth’ and ‘relations’ do not constitute grounds of
respect, in relation to tho three higher castes. This is clear from the
fact, that the Text specifies the ‘tenth stage.’ ‘Action’ and ‘Learning’
are not possible in the Śūdra; for the simple reason that he is not
entitled to these.

‘*Most*’;—all that is meant by this is *excess*, not *plurality of
number* (which would mean at least *three*); hence what is asserted
applies to tho presence of qualities also. There is nothing to justify
the notion that the term ‘*bahu*’ (from which ‘*bhūyāmsi* is derived’)
denotes *number*. Further, the term actually used is ‘*bhūyaḥ*,’ not
‘*bāhu*’; and the former is often found to be used in the sense of
*excess, much*: *e.g*., ‘*bhūyāṅśchātra parihāro*,’ ‘there is *much*
that can be said in answer to this,’ ‘*bhūyābhyudayena yokṣye,'* ‘I
shall become endowed with *much* prosperity.’ Nor is any significance
meant to be attached to the plural number in ‘*bhūyāmsi*’; the plural
number in this case denoting only *kind*, according to Pāṇini 3.2.58,
which lays down that ‘when a kind or genus is spoken of, the plural
number is optionally used.’ If significance were really meant to be
attached to the plural number, then a person possessed of only one
quality (of however high degree) would never be entitled to respect; and
this would run counter to what we h ave learnt from the foregoing verse.
Furthor, by speaking of —‘*the Śūdra who has reached the tenth
stage*’—where mere *age* (only one quality) is mentioned as a ground of
respect,—the Text has made it clear that no significance is meant to be
attached to the plural number (in ‘*bhūyāmsi*’). Usage also points to
the same conclusion.—(1.37)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted along with verse 136 in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra,
p. 474), which adds the following explanation:—Among the three castes,
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya, the person who possesses a greater amount
of the preceding qualification (among the five mentioned in 136) is to
be honoured more than one possessed of the succeeding one only. Thus a
person possessed of greater wealth and superior relations is higher than
one only older in age; one possessed of a higher degree of wealth,
relations and age is higher than one superior in action only;—one
possessed in a higher degree of wealth, relation, age and action is
superior to one possessing learning only;—‘*guṇavanti*’ means
*superior*; which means that between two persons possessing wealth, he
is higher whose wealth is *superior*; and the ‘superiority’of wealth
would consist in its having been acquired by lawful means and such other
circumstaṇces. In the case of ‘relations,’ this superiority would
consist in being more intimate and so forth;—in the case of ‘age’ it
would consist in being very much older;—in that of ‘action,’ in its
being equipped with all auxiliary details;—in that of ‘learning,’ in its
being acquired in the prescribed manner.—‘*Tenth stage*’ stands for the
age over ninety years; the hundred years of man’s life being divided
into ten equal spans, the tenth one coming after the ninetieth
year;—-when he has reached this age, the Śūdra also becomes entitled to
honour at the hands of the twice-born.

The last foot of the verse regarding the ‘tenth stage’ is quoted on p.
453 also, as declaring the respectability of the Śūdra.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 159), where ‘*daśamī*’ is
explained as ‘the last ten years of the hundred years’;—‘*bhūyāṃsi*’ as
to *number* and ‘*guṇavanti*’ as to *degree*;—hence without considering
the caste, one possessed of superior learning is to he respected by
another possessed of less; or one who knows more subjects is to be
respected by another knowing a lesser number; similarly in regard to
‘*karma*’ and other qualifications also;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 48),
which explains ‘*daśamīm gataḥ*’ as ‘over ninety years of age,’ and
‘*pañchānām*’ as ‘among learning and the rest’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 106), which explains ‘*daśamī*’ as ‘the last part of
hundred years, *i*. *e*. beyond ninety years,’ and adds that ‘old age’
is meant to be indicative of the presence of wealth and the rest also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (10.6).—‘The Śūdra also if he has children and is
over 80 years in age.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.116).—‘When the said qualities (of Learning, etc.) are
present in a very large degree, the Śūdra also deserves respect, when he
has reached old age.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

137	Whatever man of the three (highest) castes possesses most of those five, both in number and degree, that man is worthy of honour among them; and (so is) also a Sudra who has entered the tenth (decade of his life).
</details>
