+++
title = "138 चक्रिणो दशमीस्थस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Way should be made for one in a chariot, for one who is in the tenth stage of life, for one suffering from disease, for one carrying a burden, for a woman, for the person who has just passed out of studentship, for the king and for the bridegroom.—(138)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अन्यः पूजाप्रकारः प्रासङ्गिक उच्यते । **चक्री** रथिको गन्त्र्यादियानाधिरूढः । तस्य **पन्था देयः** । येन भूमिभागेन ग्रामादि देशान्तरं गम्यते स पद्धतिः पन्था उच्यते । तत्र यदि पृष्ठतः संमुखतो वा रथिक आगच्छेत् तदा तद्गमनोपरोधिनः पथिप्रदेशात्[^३८८] पदातिर् अपक्रामेत् । **दशमीस्थो** ऽत्यन्तपरिणतवयाः । **रोगी** व्याधिनात्यन्तपीडितः । **भारी** गृहीतव्रीह्यादिगुरुद्रव्यः । सो ऽपि यथोपसर्तुम् अशक्तो ऽनुग्राह्यः । **स्त्रिया** अनपेक्ष्य जातिगुणभर्तृसंबन्धान् स्त्रीत्वमात्रेणैव । **राजा** च विषयेश्वरो ऽत्राभिप्रेतः, न क्षत्रिय एव । तथा चोत्तरत्र पार्तिवग्रहणेन निगमने, पृथिव्या ईश्वरः पार्थिवः ।


[^३८८]:
     J: pathāgradeśāt

- <u>ननु</u> चोपक्रमे राजशब्दश्रवणाद् वाक्यान्तरगतः पार्थिवशब्दस् तत्पर एव युक्तः । राजशब्दो हि क्षत्रियजातिवचनो विज्ञातः । स तावद् अनुपजातविरोधित्वाद् उपक्रमगतो मुख्यार्थो ग्राह्यः । बलादिवाक्ये तु तत्सापेक्षक्षत्रियजातिविहितेन धर्मेण पृथिवीपालनाख्येन पार्थिवशब्दस्य प्रयोगसंभवेन जात्यन्तरविषयत्वम् अयुक्तम् ।

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । मान्यतात्र श्रुता । स्नातको नृपमानभागीति । तत्र क्षत्रियजातीयमात्रान् मान्यत्वं स्नातकस्य सिद्धम् एव, "ब्राह्मणं दशवर्षम्" (म्ध् २.१३५) इति । तत्र हि भूमिपशब्दः क्षत्रियजातिमात्रोपलक्षणार्थ इत्य् उक्तम् । उपलक्षणत्वाच् च राजजातेः क्षत्रियस्यापि प्रजेश्वरस्यायं धर्मो विज्ञायते । 

- **वरो** विवाहाय प्रवृत्तः । एतेषां **पन्था देयः** । त्यागमात्रं च ददत्यर्थः । त्यागश् च पथो ऽपसरणम् । अत एव चतुर्थी न कृता ॥ २.१३८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Another method of showing respect is also described by the way.

‘*Chakrin*’ is the person in a chariot, one who is occupying a cart or
some such conveyance. For him ‘*way should be made*.’ ‘*Way*’ is that
path, that part of the Earth, by which one goes to a village and such
other places; while one is on such a ‘way,’ if a man in a chariot should
happen to come either in front of him or behind him, then the man on
foot should move off from the spot where he might be obstructing the
passing of the cart.

‘*One who is in the tenth stage of life*’—one who is far advanced in
age.

‘*One suffering from a disease*’—one who is suffering very badly from
some malady.

‘*One who is carrying* a *burden*’—one who is carrying grains and other
heavy things; such a man also finds it difficult to move, and hence must
bo favoured.

‘*A woman*,’—*i.e*., simply by reason of her being a woman, irrespective
of her caste or qualifications, or of the position of her husband.

‘*King*’—stands here for the master of a kingdom, not for the mere
*Kṣatriya*. For in the conclusion (which comes in the next verse) we
have the term ‘*Pārthiva*’ which means the ‘lord of the Earth,’
‘*pṛthivyāḥ īśvaraḥ*.’

*Objection*.—“In as much as in the opening verse (the present) we have
the term ‘*rājan*,’ it would be more reasonable to interpret the term
‘*parthiva*’ (in the next verse) in accordance with, and as standing
for, the ‘*Rājā*’ (than that ‘Rājā’ should be taken as standing for the
‘*pārthiva*’), and the word ‘*Rājan*’ is well-known as denoting the
*Kṣatriya* caste; and as this forms the principal denotation of the
term, it should be accepted in the opening of the passage, specially as
there does not appear to be any incongruity in it. In the next verse,
where the relative merits are mentioned, it is quite possible to take
the term ‘*parthiva*’ as referring to the *Kṣatriya*; in view of the
fact that the ‘protecting of the Earth,’ which is connoted by the term
‘*pārtiva*.’ is a duty prescribed specifically for the *Kṣatriya*. So
that it cannot be right, to take the term as referring to other castes,
merely on the strength of their being ‘*in possession of land*’
(‘*pṛthīvyāḥ* *īśvaraḥ*’).”

To the above we make the following reply:—What is asserted here (in the
next verse) is *capability being respected*;—when, *e.g*., the person
who has just passed out of hi s studentship is described as deserving to
be honoured by a king. Under verse 35, it has been pointed out that the
term ‘*bhūmipa*’ stands for the *Kṣatriya* caste; and since the Kingly
caste is merely indicative, what is mentioned here is understood to
pertain to such a Kṣatriya as happens to be the ‘lord of men.’

The ‘*bridegroom*’—who is going to marry. For these persons ‘*way should
be made*;’—what is meant by ‘*deyaḥ*,’ ‘*should be made*,’ is simply
that one should give up the road; and as ‘giving up’ only means *moving
off* (and not actual *giving*), the Dative ending has not been
used.—(138)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 76);—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 48), which explains ‘*varaḥ*’ as ‘one who is going
to marry’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 107), which has the
following notes—‘*chakrin*,’ one who is driving in a cart,—‘*snātaka*,’
the student who has completed his course of studentship,—‘*varaḥ*,’ one
who is going to marry;—when one meets any of these, he should make way
for him, *i.e*., move away from his path,—among those mentioned here,
the Accomplished Student and the King deserve to be respected by the
‘others’, as stated in the next verse.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 138-139)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (13.25, 26).—‘Among the following—an aged person, a
child, a sick person, a man carrying a load, a woman, a man driving in a
chariot,—the succeeding should make way for the preceding; when the King
and the Accomplished Student meet, the king should make way for the
student; all should make way for a bride who is being married.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 6. 25, 26.—‘One on a chariot, a man in the tenth
stage of life, one who deserves kindness (*i.e*., the sick), a bride, an
Accomplished Student, and the King,—for these way should he made; the
King should make way for the Vedic scholar.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 3. 50 (also Devala quoted in
Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should he made for the Brāhmaṇa,
the cow, the king, the blind person, the aged, the man suffering under a
load, a pregnant woman and a weak person.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 2. 57.—‘Way should be made for the King
until he meets the Brāhmaṇa; but when he meets the Brāhmaṇa, way should
be made for the latter. All men should make way for a conveyance, for
one carrying a load, one struck with disease, and a woman; to one of
superior caste; and also to the Renunciate, and the intoxicated and the
lunatic,—these latter for the sake of one’s own safety.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 6.475).—‘Way should be made
for the dumb, the blind, the deaf, the intoxicated, the lunatic, the
loose woman, one’s enemy, a child and the outcast.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should be made
for the child, the aged, the intoxicated, the lunatic, one struck with a
foul disease, one carrying a load, a woman who is pregnant, the
Accomplished Student, the Renunciate, and also persons excelling in
learning, arts and other qualities.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should be made for
the aged, the man with a load, the King, the Accomplished Student, a
woman, the sick, the bridegroom, the man on a chariot; among these the
King deserves special honour; but the Accomplished Student deserves
honour even from the King.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

138	Way must be made for a man in a carriage, for one who is above ninety years old, for one diseased, for the carrier of a burden, for a woman, for a Snataka, for the king, and for a bridegroom.
</details>
