+++
title = "140 उपनीय तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmana who, having initiated a pupil, teaches him the Veda along with the Ritualistic and esoteric treatises,—him they call, ‘Ācārya,’ ‘Preceptor’—(140)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आचार्यादिशब्दानाम् एवार्थनिरूपणार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते । सोपचारो हि लोके एषां प्रयोगः । न च शब्दार्थसंबन्धस्य स्मर्तृभिर् आचार्यपाणिनिप्रभृतिभिर् एतन् निरूपितम् । इयं चाचार्यपदार्थस्मृतिर् व्यवहारमूला, न वेदमूला, पाणिन्यादिस्मृतिवत् । न ह्य् अत्र किंचित् कर्तव्यम् उपदिश्यते । अस्य शब्दस्यायम् अर्थ इति सिद्धरूपो ऽयम् अर्थः, न साध्यरूपः ।

- **उपनीय** उपनयनं कृत्वा **यो वेदम् अध्यापयति** ग्राहयति स **आचार्यः** । ग्रहणं चात्राध्येत्रन्तरनिरपेक्षं वाक्यानुपूर्वीस्मरणम् । **कल्प**शब्दः सर्वाङ्गप्रदर्शनार्थः । **रहस्यम्** उपनिषदः । यद्य् अपि ते ऽपि वेदशब्देनैव गृहीतास् तथापि द्वितीयस् तेषां व्यपदेशो ऽस्ति, वेदान्ता इत्य् अन्तशब्दं समीपवचनं मन्यमानो नैते वेदा इति मन्येत तदाशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थं रहस्यग्रहणम् ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु **रहस्यं** वेदार्थं वर्णयन्ति । तेन न स्वरूपग्रहणमात्राद् आचार्यकनिष्पत्तिः,[^३८९] अपि तु तद्व्याख्यानसहितात् । तथा चाभिधानकोशे ऽभिहितम्- "विवृणोति च मन्त्रार्थान् आचार्यः सो ऽभिधीयते" (म्भ् १४. अप्प्। ४- २५२८) इति । मन्त्रग्रहणं वेदवाक्योपलक्षणार्थम् । 


[^३८९]:
     M G 1st ed.: ācāryakaniṣpattiḥ

- अस्मिंश् च व्याख्याने ऽर्थावबोधो ऽप्य् आचार्यकरणविधिप्रयुक्तः स्यान् न केवलं संपाठमात्रम् । ततश् च सर्वस्य सर्वः[^३९०] स्वाध्यायविधेर्[^३९१] अनुष्ठापकः स्यात् । अस्तु परप्रयुक्ते ऽप्य् अनुष्ठाने स्वाध्यायविधेर् ब्रह्मचारिणः स्वार्थसिद्धिः । यदा तर्हि काम्यत्वाद् आचार्यकरणविधेर् आचार्यो न प्रवर्तते, तदा स्वाध्यायविध्यर्थानुष्ठानं न प्राप्नोति । ततश् च नित्यः[^३९२] स्वाधायविधिः स्यात् । न च रहस्यशब्दो वेदार्थवचनतया प्रसिद्धः । तस्मात् पूर्वम् एव रहस्यग्रहणस्य प्रयोजनम् । प्राधान्याद् वा पृथग् उपादानम् । यत् तु "विवृणोति च मन्त्रार्थान्" इत्य् अस्मृतिर् एवैषा, मन्त्रशब्दस्योपलक्षणत्वे प्रमाणाभावात् । तस्मात् पाठाभिप्रायम् अस्य विधेः प्रयोजकत्वम्[^३९३] । अतो वेदस्वरूपग्रहणे माणवकस्य जाते आचार्यकरणविधिनिर्वृत्तिः[^३९४] ॥ २.१४० ॥


[^३९४]:
     M G: -nivṛttiḥ


[^३९३]:
     M G: aprayojakatvam


[^३९२]:
     M G: nitya


[^३९१]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vidhir


[^३९०]:
     M G 1st ed.: sarveṇa sarva-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present section is taken up for determining the exact signification
of ‘*Ācārya*’ (Preceptor) and other terms. As a matter of fact, people
make use of these names on the basis of certain qualifications; and this
particular matter has not been dealt with by Pāṇini and other writers on
the subject of the meanings of words. What the present text says
regarding the meaning of the titles is based, like the Smṛti of Pāṇini
and others, upon usage, not upon the Veda; as it does not prescribe
anything *to be done*; that such and such a word means such and such a
thing is a *well-established fact*, not something *to be accomplished*.

‘*Having initiated*,’—*i.e*., having performed the Initiatory Rite,—‘*he
who teaches*’—makes him get up—‘*the Veda*’—is the ‘preceptor.’ The
‘getting up’ of the Veda here meant consists in the remembering of the
exact words of the text, independently of other learners.

‘*Kalpa*,’ ‘*Ritualistic Treatise*,’—stands here for all the Subsidiary
Sciences.—‘*Esoteric Treatises*’ are the Upaniṣads. Though these latter
also are inoluded under the name ‘Veda,’ yet the text has mentioned them
separately by the name ‘Esoteric Treatises,’ with a view to remove the
misconception that these are not Veda,—a misconception that might arise
from the fact that they have a second name ‘*Vedānta*,’ where the term
‘*anta*’ denotes ‘proximity’ (only, not *identity*).

Others have explained the term ‘*rahasya*,’ ‘*Esoteric Treatises*,’ to
mean ‘the meaning of the Vedic texts’; and by this explanation, the
teaching of the verbal text only would not make one a ‘Teacher,’ it
would be necessary ‘for him to explain the meaning also.’ To this effect
we have the following declaration in the *Abhidhāna-Kośa*;—‘He who
expounds the meanings of mantras is called the *Preceptor*”;—here the
term ‘*mantra*’ stands for all Vedic passages.

In accordance with this explanation, the learning of the meaning also,
and not the mere getting up of the Text, would be prompted by the
injunction of ‘becoming a Preceptor so that for every man the injunction
of Vedic study would come to be carried out by other persons.

“That may be so; but even when the Injunction of Vedic study is carried
out by other persons, the purpose of the student becomes accomplished
all the same.”

In that case then, since ‘becoming a Preceptor’ is a purely voluntary
act, if the Teacher does not have recourse to the necessary activity,
then the carying out of the injunction of Vedic study would remain
unaccomplished; so that this injunction of Vedic study would no longer
be compulsory.

Then again, as a matter of fact, the term ‘*rahasya*,’ ‘*esoteric
treatise*,’ is not ordinarily known as denoting the ‘explanation of the
meaning of Vedic texts.’

From all this it is clear that the purpose of adding the term
‘*rahasya*’ is as explained before.

Or, the separate mention of the ‘*Upaniṣads*,’ may be explained as
indicating the importance of that part of the Veda.

As regards the declaration quoted above—‘he is called Preceptor who
explains the meaning of mantras,’—this is not a *Smṛti* (and hence not
authoritative). Nor is there any ground for taking the term ‘*mantra*’
as standing for *Vedic texts* in general.

For all these reasons it is dear that the purpose of the present
Injunction lies in the reading of the mere Text. So that when the boy
has accomplished the getting up of the words of the Veda, this also
means that he has carried out the injunction of ‘becoming a
Teacher.’—(140)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Rahasyam*’—‘The Upaniṣads, along with their explanations—(Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nandana, and Rāghavānanda);—‘the esoteric
explanations of the Vedas and the subsidiary sciences,—not the
*Upaniṣads*, these being included in the term ‘*Veda*’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse has supplied Prabhākara with his text on which to base the
entire enquiry into the nature of Dharma. Kumārila has taken as his
basic text the Vedic text ‘*svādhyāyo’dhyetavyaḥ*’ (), and has proceeded
to explain that the ‘*Svādhyāya*,’ ‘Vedic Study,’ herein enjoined cannot
be the mere reading up of the verbal text of the Veda, but also a due
understanding of its meaning; and as this meaning could not be
comprehended without careful investigation, it becomes necessary to
undertake the investigation initiated by the Mīmāṃsā Śāstra,

The sentence ‘*svādhyāyo’dhyetavyaḥ*’ contains in reality the injunction
of that Vedic recitation which is done daily, and not of the initial
study and scrutiny of the sense etc. Hence Mādhava (in Parāśaramādhava,
Ācāra, p. 1'40) has suggested that the basic text for Kumārila should
have been that Vedic text which we assume on the basis of the
Smṛti-rules relating to *Upanayana*.

Prabhākara does not accept Kumārila’s view. He argues that, according to
the view of Kumārila, any and every man—twice-born or otherwise—would be
entitled to Vedic study, only if he fulfils the condition of desiring to
know *Dharma*. Prabhākara bases his enquiry into Dharma and Vedic study
on the rule ‘*aṣṭavarṣam brāhmaṇam upanayīta*’, where the Ātmanepada
standing in ‘*upanayīta*’ clearly implies that the *Upanayana*,
Initiation of the Pupil, is meant to serve some purpose for the
Initiator himself; this purpose is no other than the acquiring of the
title of ‘Ācārya—how this title can be acquired is explained in the
present text of Manu, according to which that man alone is to be called
*Ācārya*. who (*a*) initiates the pupil, and (*b*) teaches him the Veda
along with the Ritualistic and Esoteric Treatises. The motive-desire
thus, for all this study and investigation is on the part of the
teacher, and not on that of the pupil; it is the Teacher who desires to
acquire for himself the title of Ācārya and as this cannot be done
without *teaching*, the pupil comes in only as the person *to be
taught*; and as the latter cannot be a pupil until he studies, this
studying by the pupil is implied by the above texts. This explanation
avoids the difficulty of a *non-dvija* undertaking. Vedic study; the
prospective Teacher being a learned man, conversant with the law, would
never admit a *non* - *dvija* pupil. Though the injunction of Vedic
study is thus implied in the above-quoted texts, yet they do not supply
the motive for the pupil; the Teacher’s desire for obtaining a title and
honor cannot serve as a motive for the pupil; hence, it is explained,
the motive purpose of the pupil lies in his desire to learn the meaning
of the Veda; this is what leads him to proceed with the investigation
into Dharma.

This view of Prabhākara has been combated, in its turn, by Mādhava
(Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, pp. 138-139), who argues that Teaching having
been laid down as means of livelihood, it is clearly a *Kāmya-karma*—an
act prompted by physical motives—and hence *anitya*, non-obligatory; as
such it cannot be accepted as the sole prompter of the act of *Vedic
Study*, which is *nitya*, obligatory; the latter must have an
independent injunction for itself.

It is in connection with the above discussion in course of its
presentation of Prabhākara’s view, that the present verse has been
quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 137); and again on p. 304, where
it is put forward as setting forth the definition of the ‘*Ācārya*’ as
distinguished from the ‘*Upādhyāya*.’

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 477), as
defining the ‘Ācārya’—where ‘*Kalpa*’ is explained as *a particular
treatise which lays down, on the basis of clearly perceptible Vedic
texts, the practical details of ritual*; and as including the other
subsidiary sciences also;—and ‘*rahasya*’ as *Upaniṣads*,—these being
mentioned separately (from the Veda) by reason of their importance;—and
in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 45) which explains ‘*rahasyam*’ as standing for
the Upaniṣads.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 30);—in *Aparārka* (p. 65), which
adds that the term ‘*Kalpa*’ includes Grammar and the other subsidiary
sciences, as also Mīmāṃsā and Nyāya,—the etymological meaning of the
term being ‘that which *determines* (*kalpayati*) the meaning of the
Veda;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 90) to the effect that the
Ācārya is to teach not only the Veda, but the Upaniṣads, and the
Ritualistic Manuals &c., also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.10-11.—‘The Upanayana is the second birth....
He from whom this is received is the *Ācārya*.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.24-27.—‘He from whom one gathers (learns,
*ācinoti*) his duties is the Ācārya; he brings about the essence of
knowledge; this constitutes the *highest birth*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-smṛti*, 3. 24.—‘He who having initiated him, teaches him the
entire Veda is the *Ācārya*.’

*Viṣṇu-smṛti*, 29.1.—‘He who having initiated the pupil and taught him
the observances, teaches him the Veda, should be known as the *Ācārya*.’

*Yājñavalkya-smṛti*, 1.34.—‘He who, after initiating, teaches the Veda
is called the *Ācārya*.’

*Tama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 478).—‘He is called *Ācārya* who is
truthful in speech, steady, expert, kind to all beings, orthodox,
devoted to the Veda and pure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

140	They call that Brahmana who initiates a pupil and teaches him the Veda together with the Kalpa and the Rahasyas, the teacher (akarya, of the latter).
</details>
