+++
title = "142 निषेकादीनि कर्माणि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That Brāhmaṇa, who performs, in the prescribed manner, one’s sacramental rites beginning with the rites of impregnation, and supports him with food, is called the “Guru,” “Mentor.”—(142)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निषेकग्रहणात् पितुर् अयं गुरुत्वोपदेशः । **निषेको** रेतःसेकः, स आदिर् येषां कर्मणाम् । **आदि**ग्रहणात् सर्वे संस्कारा गृह्यन्ते । तानि **यः करोत्य् अन्नेन च यः संभावयति** संवर्धयति । "चैवेनम्" इति वा पाठः । अर्थस् तु स एव, अन्नेनैव संभावनोपपत्तेः । अर्थान्तरनिर्देशः एनं कुमारम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चान्वादेशः । न चेह कुमारस्य पूर्वम् उपदेशः । <u>नैवम्</u> । कस्यान्यस्य **निषेकादीनि** क्रियन्ते ।[^३९६] सामर्थ्याद् अपि निर्देशो न निर्देशत एव । तानि **यः करोति** । एवम् आभ्यां गुणाभ्यां हीनः केवलजनकत्वे पितैव भवति न गुरुः । न चैवं मन्तव्यम् असति गुरुत्वे नासौ मान्यः । सर्वप्रथमम् असाव् एव मान्यः । तथा च भगवान् व्यासः- 


[^३९६]:
     M G place here: tāni yaḥ karoti (M = yat)

- प्रभुः शरीरप्रभवः प्रियकृत् प्राणदो गुरुः ।

- हितानाम् उपदेष्टा च प्रथ्यक्षं दैवतं पिता ॥ इति ।

**विप्र**ग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम् ॥ २.१४२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mention of the ‘Rites of Impregnation’ indicates that the present
verse lays down the fact of the Father being a ‘Mentor.’

‘*Niṣeka*’ ‘Impregnation,’ is the ‘Sprinkling of the semen’:—those acts
of which the ‘Impregnation’ is the first or beginning; the term
‘beginning’ shows that all the Sacramental Rites are meant.

He who performs these rites and also ‘*supports*’—fosters—‘*with food*.’

‘*Chaivainam*’ is another reading (for ‘*cānnena*’). The meaning remains
the same; as ‘supporting’ can be done only by means of *food*. The only
additional sense obtained from this other reading is the reference, by
means of the pronoun ‘*enam*,’ to the boy.

“As a matter of fact, ‘*enam* is only a relative pronoun; and the ‘Boy’
does not appear anywhere here as its antecedent.”

There is no force in this; for whom else (if not for the *boy*) are the
Kites of Impregnation and the rest performed? And ‘reference’ is often
only *implied*, not always expressly stated.

He who does not fulfil these two conditions, but gives one birth, is
only a ‘progenitor,’ not a ‘mentor.’ Nor should the notion be
entertained that, not being a ‘mentor,’ he should not be respected; as a
matter of fact, he is the very first to deserve respect; as says the
revered Vyāsa—‘The Father is the master, the source of the body, the
benefactor, the life-giver, the mentor, the advisor, of all that is
good, the visible God.’

The mention of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ is only illustrative.—(142)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 302) as defining
the ‘*guru*’, the clasping of whose feet has been prescribed;—also in
the *Prāyaścitta-kāṇḍa* of the same work (p. 259), in support of the
view that the term ‘*guru*’ denotes primarily the *father* only;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 477), which adds the following explanatory
notes:—‘*Niṣeka*’—the rites of conception; and the sacramental rites
referred to are those beginning with these and ending with the
‘imparting of the Veda’;—‘*sambhāvayati*’ means *nourishes*. The
performance of the rites of conception alone is sufficient to entitle
the man to the title of ‘*guru*’; the other qualifications have been
added only with a view to indicate that the person referred to here
deserves higher honor than the Ācārya;—such is the view of Śūlapāṇi.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 31) on the other hand, states that the term
‘*vipraḥ*’ stands here for the *Father*; from which it follows that a
father who does not fulfil the conditions stated is not a ‘*guru*’ at
all.

The verse is also quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.- 259, p. 1297) in support
of the view that the term ‘*guru'* primarly denotes the *Father*, the
title ‘*guru '* belonging to the person who performs the conception and
other rites, *i.e*., the progenitor himself;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Prāyaścitta, p. 11 b);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 88), which
explains ‘*niṣeka*’ as *garbhādhāna*, and adds that ‘*annasambhāvana*’
includes the ‘teaching of Veda’ also;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 44), to
the effect that the Father alone is the ‘*guru*’;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*
(p. 356) to the same effect;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 128) to the
same effect; but it combats the view that the *Father* only is entitled
to be called ‘*guru*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

See also Manu, 149.

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.34.—‘He is the *Guru* who, having performed all the
rites, imparts the Veda to the pupil.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 478).—‘He is a *Guru* who is fully
equipped with knowledge of the Veda, has excellent character, with
senses under control.’

*Hārīta* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 303),

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 65),

‘The sub-teacher, the father, the elder brother, the king, the maternal
uncle, the father-in-law, the protector, the maternal and paternal
grand-fathers, the uncle, one of the superior caste,—these are *gurus*
among males. The mother, the maternal and paternal grandmothers, the
teacher’s wife, the uterine sisters of the father and of the mother, the
mother-in-law, and the elderly nurse,—these are *gurus* among females,’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 65).—‘Maternal grandfather, maternal uncle,
paternal uncle, father-in-law are *gurus*; the elder brother, the
Accomplished Student and the Ṛtvik are to be inspected like the *guru*.
The mother’s sister, the maternal aunt, the mother-in-law, the nurse,
the father’s sister, the paternal grandmother, the paternal aunt and the
teacher’s wife are to be treated as the mother.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

142	That Brahmana, who performs in accordance with the rules (of the Veda) the rites, the Garbhadhana (conception-rite), and so forth, and gives food (to the child), is called the Guru (the venerable one).
</details>
