+++
title = "145 उपाध्यायान् दशाचार्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In veneration, the Preceptor excels ten Sub-teachers; the Father a hundred preceptors, and the Mother a thousand Fathers.—(145)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

स्तुत्यक्रमेण प्रकृष्टपूर्वविधानम् । उपाध्यायाच् छ्रेष्ट आचार्यस् तस्मात् पिता ततो ऽपि मातेति । दशादिसंख्यानिर्देशः स्तुतिमात्रम् । पूर्वस्मात् पूर्वस्मात् परस्य परस्यातिशयो विवक्षितः । अत एव सहस्रं पितुर् इति वचनम् । 

- **उपाध्यायान् दशातिरिच्यते** । दशभ्य उपाध्यायेभ्यो ऽधिकः । कथं पुनर् अत्र द्वितीया । अतिर् अयं कर्मप्रवचनीयः । उपाध्यायान् अतिक्रम्यातिक्रम्यातिरिच्यते **गौरवेण** सातिशयेन युज्यते । अथ वाधिक्यम् अतिरेकः तद्धेतुके ऽभिभवे धातुर् वर्तते । गौरवाधिक्येनोपाध्यायान् अभिभवति । **अतिरिच्यत** इति कर्मकर्तरि द्वितीया चाविरुद्धा "दुहिपच्योर् बहुलं सकर्मकयोः" (पाण् वार् १४ ओन् ३.१.८७) इति बहुलग्रहणात् । 

- <u>ननु</u> चानन्तरम् एव वक्ष्यति "गरीयान् ब्रह्मदः पिता" इति, इह चाचार्यात् पितुर् आधिक्यम् उच्यते तद् इतरेतरव्याहतम् । <u>नैष दोषः</u> । इहाचार्यो नैरुक्तदर्शनेनाध्यापकः, संस्कारमात्रेणाचारोपदेशमात्रेण चाभिप्रेतः- आचार्य आचारं ग्राहयतीति । न चैष नियमः स्वशास्त्रसिद्धाभिर् एव संज्ञाभिर् व्यवहारः । गुरुशब्दो ह्य् अत्र पितरि परिभाषितः, आचार्ये च तत्र तत्र प्रयुज्यते । तेन स्वल्पोपकाराद् उपनयनमात्रकराद् आचारग्राहकाद् अध्यापनरहिताद् इदं पितुर् ज्यायस्त्वम् । 

- अस्मिंश् च क्रमे विवक्षिते समवाय एतेषां माता प्रथमं वन्द्या ततः पिता तत आचार्यस् तत उपाध्यायः ॥ २.१४५ ॥

_मुख्याचार्यसंनिधौ पितरि च संस्कर्तरि संनिहिते कः_[^४००]_ क्रमः । अत आह । _


[^४००]:
     M G: tatra
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse lays down the relative superiority among the persons intended
to be eulogised. The Preceptor is superior to the Sub-teacher, the
Father is superior to the Preceptor, and the Mother is superior even to
the Father. The specification of the numbers ‘ten’ and the rest is
purely valedictory. All that is meant is that the following is superior
to the preceding; hence it is that we have the expression ‘a thousand
Fathers.’

‘*Excels ten Sub-teachers*’—*i.e*., he is superior to ten Sub-teachers.

“Why have we the Accusative ending here?”

The ‘*ati*’ (in ‘*atiricyate*’) is a preposition; the construction
being—*upādhyāyān* *ati* (in reference to Sub-teachers);—and this means
that ‘surpassing each of the ten sub-teachers, he becomes endowed with
greater honour.’ Or, the ‘*atireka*,’ *excelling* (denoted by the verb
‘*atiricyate*’), means *excess*, the verbal root being used here in the
sense of‘subjugation caused by excess’; the sense being that ‘by excess
of respect he subdues ten sub-teachers’. Lastly, if we take the verb
‘*atiricyate*’ as the reflexive passive form, the Accusative ending
becomes quite consistent; specially as the Vārtika (on Pāṇini, 3.1.87)
speaks of ‘wide usage’ in connection with such transitive verbs as
‘milk,’ ‘cook’ and the like.

*Objection*.—“The very next verse is going to assert that the ‘Father
who imparts the Veda is the superior while the present verse declares
the Father to be superior to the Preceptor: and this is mutually
contradictory.”

There is no force in this objection. According to etymologists the
“*Ācārya*’ is not one who *teaches*; hence in the present verse the term
stands for one who only performs the sacramental rites and teaches
merely the rules of conduct;—Ācārya being one who makes one learn *ā*
*cāra*. It is not necessary that one should always use only such names
as arc current in one’s own science; *e.g*., the term ‘*guru*’ in the
present treatise, has been declared to stand for the *father*, and is
also used here and then; for the *preceptor*. From all this it is clear
that the superiority of the father here meant is only over that person
who confers upon one only a slight benefit, who only performs the
Initiatory Rite and teaches the Rules of Conduct, and does not do any
teaching.

The order of precedence being as here laid down, it follows that at a
place where all these are present, the Mother is to be saluted first,
then the Father, then the Preceptor, then the Sub-teacher.—(145)

The question arising as regards the order of precedence when the real
Preceptor, and the Father who has performed the Initiatory Rite are both
present,—the next verse supplies the answer.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The first quarter of this is referred to in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p.
304).

The verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 31);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Saṃskāra, p. 478), where the following notes are added:—In point of
veneration, the ‘*Ācārya*’ is superior as compared to ten
‘*Upādhyāyas*’, the Father is superior to a hundred *Ācāryas*, and the
Mother is superior to a thousand Fathers;—the person spoken of as
*ācārya* here is the person who performs the *Upanayana* and teaches the
*Sāvtrī* only (not the entire Veda),—as is clear from the next verse
where the man who performs the *Upanayana* and teaches the entire Veda
is described as superior to the Father.

This same explanation is given by Medhātithi and Kullūka also.
Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa on the other hand, hold that the word ‘*Pitā*’,
‘Father’, stands for that Father who, having begotten the child,
performs its *Upanayana* and himself teaches it the entire Veda.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 92), which adds
that the Father meant here is one who is a mere Progenitor and has not
performed any sacramental rites for the boy; in other eases, when he
*has* performed these, it is the Father that is superior.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2.58.—‘Among elders the Ācārya is the highest;
the mother—say some.’

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 13.17.—(Manu’s words reproduced.)

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.35.—‘These deserve to be respected in the order in
which they are mentioned; the mother is more venerable than all of
them.’

*Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 478).—(Manu’s words
reproduced.)

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 479).—‘One should not
intervene between his Father and Mother; he may speak in favour of his
mother: as she is the person that bore him and brought him up.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra).—‘Of the two the Father is superior,
on account of the supremacy attaching to the seed: in the absence of the
Father, the Mother is the highest; and in her absence, the elder
brother.’

*Purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 304).—‘By law these are two *gurus* for
man: the Father and the Mother; between these two, the Father is
superior, then the Mother, then the elder brother.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘For ten months she keeps the child in her womb,
suffering from shooting pains, then she gives him birth, being rendered
unconscious in the process; devoted to her son, she regards him as
superior even to her very life; who can recompense her even in a hundred
years?’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

145	The teacher (akarya) is ten times more venerable than a sub-teacher (upadhyaya), the father a hundred times more than the teacher, but the mother a thousand times more than the father.
</details>
