+++
title = "172 नाऽभिव्याहारयेद् ब्रह्म"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should hot pronounce Vedic texts, apart from the Svadhā-offering; because so long as he is not born in the Veda, he is equal to a śūdra.—(172)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"आ मौञ्जिबन्धनात्" इत्य् अनुवर्तते । यदि वा **यावद् वेदे न जायत** इत्य् अर्थवादतो ऽवधिपरिनिश्चयः । **ब्रह्म** वेदस् तन् नोच्चारयेत् । पितुर् अयम् उपदेशः । यथा मद्यपानादिभ्यो रक्षेत् तथा वेदाक्षरोच्चारणात् । 

- <u>केचित्</u> त्व् इमम् एव ब्रह्माभिव्याहारनिषेधं प्राग् उपनयाद् व्याकरणाद्यङ्गध्ययने ज्ञापकं वर्णयन्ति । णिजर्थं व्याचक्षते- पित्रा न वचनीयः, बाल्यात् तु कानिचिद् अव्यक्तानि वेदवाक्यानि स्वयं पठतो न दोषः । 

- <u>एतत् तु न युक्तम्</u> । स्मृत्यन्तरे हि पठ्यते- "न ब्रह्माभिव्याहरेत्" इति (ग्ध् २.५) । अर्थवादे च श्रुतं **शूद्रेण हि समस् तावद्** इति । यथा शूद्रो दुष्यति तद्वद् अयम् अपीत्य् उक्तं भवति । 

- **स्वधा**शब्देन पितृभ्यः कल्पितम् अन्नम् इहोच्यते । अथ वा पित्र्यं कर्म **स्वधा**शब्देनोच्यते । तन् **निनीयते** त्यज्यते प्राप्यते येन मन्त्रेण स **स्वधानिनयनः**- "शुन्धन्तां पितरः" (आश्श् २.६.१४) इत्यादिः । तं वर्जयित्वान्यमन्त्रो नोच्चारयितव्यः । अनुपनीतेनोदकदाननवश्राद्धादि पितुः कर्तव्यम् इत्य् अस्माद् एव प्रतीयते । पार्वणश्राद्धादौ त्व् अग्निमत्त्वाभावाद् अनधिकारः । पिण्डान्वाहार्यके[^४२७] हि तद् वक्ष्यते । तृतीये चैतन् निपुणम् उपपादयिष्यामः ॥ २.१७२ ॥


[^४२७]:
     M G 1st ed.: -hāryakaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The phrase ‘*till the tying of the girdle*’ has to be construed with
this verse; or the intended limit may be taken as supplied by the
commendatory statement contained in the second half—‘*so long as he is
not born in the* *Veda*.’

‘*Brahma*’—Vedic text—‘*he should not pronounce*.’ This is an
instruction to the father of the boy; the sense being that he should
guard the child from pronouncing Vedic texts in the same manner as ho
guards him from the drinking of wine and such other acts.

Some people interpret this prohibition of pronouncing Vedic texts to
indicate the propriety of learning the Subsidiary Sciences before
*Upanayana*. They further explain the causal affix (in
‘*abhivyāhārayet*’) to mean that the child should not be made by his
father to pronouce Vedic texts, there is no harm done if the child
himself pronounces a few indistinct words of the Veda.’

But this is not right; as we read in another *Smṛti*—‘He should not
*pronounce* Vedic texts’ (Gautama, 2.5). And in the following
commendatory statement also it is stated that ‘*he is equal to a
Śūdra,'* which means that the child pronouncing Vedic texts is just as
reprehensible as the Śūdra.

The term ‘*svadhā*’ stands for the food offered to Pitṛs; or, the term
may stand for the ‘rites performed in honour of Pitṛs’.; and the term
‘*svadhāninayana'* means ‘that mantra by means of which the said food is
offered or given’; *e.g*., such mantras as ‘*śundhantām pitaraḥ*’ and so
forth. With the exception of such mantras, the boy should not pronounce
any Vedic texts.

It is from this that we deduce the fact that the uninitiated boy should
offer to his father libations of water, the ‘*nava-śrāddha*’; etc. That
he is not entitled to the *Pārvana* and other *śrāddhas* follows from
the fact of his still being without the ‘Fire.’ These latter shall be
described under the section on ‘*Piṇḍānrāhāryaka* (?).’ We shall explain
all this in full detail in *Adhyāya III*.—(172)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (I, p. 24) in support of the view
that the uninitiated twice-born is like the Śūdra, and as such should
not pronounce Vedic mantras except in Śrāddha;—again in the same work,
on p. 795, to the same effect, where it adds the following
notes:—‘*svadḥā*’ is *śrāddha*’, and ‘*svadhāninayana*’ means ‘that
group of mantras by which the śrāddha is *accomplished*’ (‘*svadhā
śrāddham ninīyate yena mantrajātena*’);—barring this group of mantras,
he shall pronounce none other; in every other case the mantra would be
recited for him by a Brāhmaṇa.—The same work (II, p. 383) quotes the
verse again, in support of the view that the uninitiated boy also is
entitled to recite Vedic mantras at *śrāddhas*;—where ‘*abhivyāhārayet*’
is explained as ‘*vadet*’, *should pronounce*, the causal affix ‘*ṇich*’
being used reflexively.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 327) quotes the second line, in support of
the view that whenever the twice-born person is described as *having the
character of the Śūdra*, it is by reason of his being not entitled to
Vedic Study;—again on p. 348, where it is explained that ‘equality to
the Śūdra’ is a ground for the man’s not being entitled to rites
involving the use of Vedic mantras;—that this is so is indicated by the
particle ‘*hi*,’ (which means *because*)...... In fact whenever a
twice-born person is spoken of as being *like the Śūdra*, what is meant
is that he is not entitled to the performance of rites involving the use
of Vedic mantras.

It is quoted in *Vyāvahāra Bālambhaṭṭi*, (p. 656);—and in
*Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 23), as laying down the law for the uninitiated.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.12).—‘In character, he should be regarded as a Śūdra,
until he is born in the Veda.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.7).—‘Until he becomes born in the Veda, he remains, in
character, equal to the Śūdra.’

*Gautama* (2.4, 5, 9).—‘The boy may urinate or stool as he pleases; for
him there are no rules regarding water—sip-piug; he should not pronounce
Vedic texts, except at offerings to Pitṛs.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 327).—‘So long as the boy has
not been initiated there is no harm done if he does not observe rules
regarding what should or should not be eaten or what should or should
not be spoken or regarding lying.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra).—‘He may do and eat and say what
he likes, short of committing degrading sins.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

172	(He who has not been initiated) should not pronounce (any) Vedic text excepting (those required for) the performance of funeral rites, since he is on a level with a Sudra before his birth from the Veda.
</details>
