+++
title = "173 कृतोपनयनस्याऽस्य व्रतादेशनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the boy whose initiatory rite has been performed, instruction regarding; observances is considered desirable; as also the getting up of the Veda, in due course, according to the prescribed rule.—(173)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कृतोपनयनस्याऽस्य  
व्रतादेशनम् इष्यते ।  
ब्रह्मणो ग्रहणं चैव  
क्रमेण विधि-पूर्वकम्  ॥ २.१७३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Verse 2.69 has laid down the order of sequence among Cleanliness, Right
Conduct and Vedic Study: and hence the Veda should be read in that same
order. The learning of the Veda having become possible after the
Initiatory Rite, the present verse serves to lay down the order in which
it is to be done. The boy, on being initiated, should keep the
‘*Traividya*’ and other observances; and then proceed to study the Veda.

‘*For the boy whose Initiatory rite has been performed*,’—*i.e*.,—for
tho Religious Student—‘*instruction reagarding obser* *vances is
considered desirable*,’—and is actually done by teachers. As a matter of
fact, it is on the strength of the scriptures that the said instruction
is ‘considered desirable’; hence the ‘desirability’ spoken of stands for
the ‘necessity of doing’ it.

After this instruction follows the ‘*getting up of the veda*,’—‘*in due
order*’—as here described ,—‘*according to the prescribed rule*.’—This
is a reiteration, for the purpose of filling up the metre.—(173)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vrata*’—‘The Vedic *vratas*, of the *Godāna* and the rest’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja, and Rāghavānanda);—‘the observances and
restrictive rules, such as offering fuel, the prohibition of sleeping in
the day-time, and the like’ (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa);—‘Penances, like the
*Prājāpatya*’ (Nandana and Nārayāṇa).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (22.1-2).—‘Having tied the girdle, and handed
over the staff, he should direct him to Religious Studentship—“Thou art
a Religious Student, sip water, do your duty, sleep not during the day,
study the Veda under the Teacher.”’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-15).—‘The Teacher, having initiated the boy, should
teach him the Veda preceded by the *mahāvyāhṛtis*, and instruct him
regarding cleanliness and conduct.’

*Gautama* (2-20).—‘The restrictions begin with the Upa nayana.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.2.11, 17-20).—‘On being initiated, the boy
should reside in the Teacher’s family, as a Religious Student; there is
no fasting for the Religious Student desirous of acquiring knowledge;
the rule for the Religious Student is that he should he entirely under
the Teacher, except as regards the committing of degrading sins; he
should he ever bent upon the good of the Teacher, never crossing him in
speech.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (4.13, 14, 16).—‘Morning and evening, he should
fetch a jar of water;—every day he should bring fuel from the forest and
keep it on the ground;—having kindled the fire and swept round it, he
should lay fuel on it, morning and evening, in accordance with the
instructions he receives.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (5.5).—‘He should do such acts as might be
pleasing to the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.1).—‘For Religious Students, residence in the Teacher’s
house.’

*Viṣṇu* (2,14).—‘The offering of the two Twilight Prayers; and after
offering it, he should salute the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (34-35).—‘Thus he should make his own either one Veda, or two
Vedas, or three Vedas; then the Vedic Subsidiaries.’

*Viṣṇu* (34-42).—‘After having made the Veda his own, he should obtain
the Teacher’s permission and offer him an excellent thing and then
bathe.’

*Viṣṇu* (19.1).—‘Him should one know as the *Teacher* who initiates him,
teaches him the observances and teaches tho Veda.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (2.20. 33-34).—‘Then he directs the boy—thou art a
Religious Student,—fetch fuel, sip water, do thy duty, sleep not during
the day.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 4. 1).—‘The Religious Student should study the
Veda.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 1. 7).—‘The Religious Student having studied
the Veda, should make the final offering of fuel on the fire.’

*Śaṅkha* (3.1-2).—‘Having initiated the pupil, the Teacher should first
of all instruct him regarding cleanliness, course of conduct,
fire-tending, the offering of Twilight-Prayers. That person is the
*Guru* who having performed all the rites, imparts to him the Veda.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

173	The (student) who has been initiated must be instructed in the performance of the vows, and gradually learn the Veda, observing the prescribed rules.
</details>
