+++
title = "175 सेवेतेमांस् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With a view to enhancing his own piety, the Rreligious Student should, while living with his Teacher, observe all these rules,—having fully subjugated all his organs.—(175)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वक्ष्यमाणस्य यमनियमसमूहस्य पृथक्प्रकरणत्वेन श्लोको ऽयं गौरवख्यापनार्थः । एवं तु यत् पूर्वम् उक्तं तद् अवश्यकर्तव्यम् । इदं तु ततो गुरुतरम् अनुष्ठीयमानं महते फलाय । 

- **ब्रह्मचारि**ग्रहणं प्रकरणान्तरत्वेनातद्धर्माशङ्कयानुसंधानार्थम्- यदि ब्रह्मचारिधर्म एव आसीत् किं तर्हीदम् उच्यते प्रकरणान्तरम् इति । पूर्वेभ्य एतेषाम् अतिशयात् समानधर्मत्वाद् एतावता वैलक्षण्येन प्रकरणान्तरत्वव्यवहारः । परिशिष्टानि पदानि श्लोकपूरणार्थतयानूद्यन्ते । 

- **सेवेत** अनुतिष्ठेत । **इमान्** वक्ष्यमाणान् । बुद्धौ संनिहितत्वाद् इदमा निर्दिश्यन्ते । **गुरौ वसन्** गुरुसमीपे विद्याध्ययनार्थं वसन् इति नित्यसंनिधानम् आह[^४३०] । **संनियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं** प्रागुक्तेन मार्गेण । **तपोवृद्ध्यर्थम्** अध्ययनविध्यनुष्ठानजन्यात्मसंस्कारार्थम्[^४३१] ॥ २.१७५ ॥


[^४३१]:
     M G 1st ed.: adhyāyavidhy-


[^४३०]:
     M G 1st ed.: vasan | niyamān āha |

_तानीदानीं पूर्वेण प्रतिज्ञातान् नियमान्_[^४३२]_ आह ।_


[^४३२]:
     M G 1st ed.: pratijñātān pūrveṇa niyamān; G 2nd ed: niyamān pūrveṇa pratijñātān
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The Author is going to set forth a set of restraints and observances, in
a section by themselves; and the present verse is intended to emphasise
the importance of these; the sense being that what has been said before
must be done, but what is coming next is even more important and
conducive to superior results.

The term ‘Religious Student’ has been added in order to preclude the
suspicion that a fresh section having begun here, the duties that are
going to bo described are not meant for the student.

“If the text is continuing to describe the duties of the Religious
Student, why should this be regards as a different section?”

Even though what are going to be described are similar in character to
those that have gone before, yet there is a certain superiority
attaching to them; and it is purely on the ground of this slight
distinction that their?tr?eatment has been regarded as forming a
different section.

The remaining words of the Text are explained as added for the purpose
of making up the verse.

‘*Should observe*,’—Should follow.

‘*These*’—Those going to be described. The pronoun ‘this’ always refers
to what happens to be uppermost in the mind.

‘*Living with his Teacher*’—for the purpose of acquiring learning. The
participle ‘*living*’ indicates permanent proximity.

‘*Having fully controlled his organs*’—in the manner described above.
(Verses 88—100.)

‘*With a view to enhancing piety*’;—*i.e*., for the purpose of that
embellishment of himself which is brought about by the proper observance
of the Injunction of Vedic Study.—(175)

The Author proceeds to describe the rules spoken of in the preceding
verse.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 493) as laying
down the necessity of observing the rules and regulations prescribed for
the Student;—in *Aparārka* (p. 62), which explains that the particle
‘*ca*’ is added with a view to include those observances and
restrictions that Have been prescribed'for the Religious Student in
other Smṛtis;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 122).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghvāśvalāyana Smṛti* (1.5).—‘The Religious Student, firm in his own
duty, should remain devoted to the service of the Teacher.’

*Laghvāśvālāyana Smṛti* (12.15-16).—‘Then he should make the student get
up the Veda on such days as are fit for study; being initiated, from
that day onwards for six months, he should serve the Teacher and study
the Veda in the prescribed manner.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (5.2-3).—‘Having studied either one Veda, or two Vedas, or
three Vedas,—his studentship unruffled, the Religious Student should
serve the Teacher.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (26.18-19).—‘As horses, without a chariot, or a chariot
without horses, so is Austerity without Knowledge, and Knowledge without
Austerity. Just as food mixed with honey, or honey mixed with food, is
wholesome, so also are Knowledge and Austerity united.’

*Gautama* (3.9.5).—‘Conducting himself thus, with senses subdued, he
reaches Brahmic regions.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.2,11,12,19,26).—‘After initiation, residence
in the Teacher’s house...... He should never have sexual intercourse.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (4. 23, 29).—‘He should every day safeguard the
interests of the Teacher by means of virtuous and prudent acts; the
Religious Student, with mind concentrated, should perform all useful
acts.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (5.1, 5, 9-11).—‘The term Austerity stands for
the Restrictions; he should perform such acts as may be pleasing to the
Teacher;—attentive to Vedic study, bent upon Dharma, fixed in austerity,
straightforward and merciful, thus does the Religious Student become
accomplished.’

*Viṣṇu* (27.47).—‘The Brāhmaṇa who carries on his studentship in this
manner goes to the highest place and is not born again.’

*Viṣṇu* (1.24).—‘Delighting in learning the Veda, living under the
Teacher, bent upon the Teacher’s good.’

*Vyāsasmṛti* (1.24).—‘Being initiated, he should reside in the Teacher’s
house, ever calm and collected; on a sacred day, having pronounced the
Praṇava and the Gāyatrī, he should begin the study of the Veda, also the
Dharmaśāstra, for the purpose of understanding cleanliness and conduct;
having duly read all this from the Teacher, he should act so as to
please him; in this manner should he keep the observances of his
studentship. He should ever attend upon him till he completes his Veda
study.’

*Nārada* (5.8-15).—‘Till he has mastered the sciences, the student shall
attend diligently on his Teacher; the same conduct has to be observed by
him towards the Teacher’s wife and son. He shall preserve chastity and
beg alms, lying on a low couch and using no ornaments. He shall go to
rest after, and rise before, all persons in the Teacher’s house. He
shall never come or stay without his Teacher’s bidding; his Teacher’s
call he must obey without hesitation, when he is able to do so. He shall
read at the proper time, when his Teacher is not averse to it, sitting
on a lower seat than his Teacher, by his side, or on a bench and paying
attention to what he says. Science, like the current of a stream, is
constantly advancing towards the plain; therefore one studying science
should be humble towards his Teacher. His Teacher shall correct him, if
he is not obedient, scolding him or chastising him with a rope or with a
small shoot of cane. The Teacher shall not strike him a heavy blow; nor
on the head or on the chest; and he must encourage him after having
chastised him. Otherwise the king shall punish the Teacher. After having
completed his studies, he shall give the customary present to his
Teacher and return home. Thus should be the conduct of the Student.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

175	But a student who resides with his teacher must observe the following restrictive rules, duly controlling all his organs, in order to increase his spiritual merit.
</details>
