+++
title = "176 नित्यं स्नात्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Every day, having bathed and become clean, he should make offerings to deities, Sages and Fathers, and do the worshipping of the deities and the placing of fuel.—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रत्यहं **स्नात्वा शुचिः** स्नानेनापनीताशुचिभावो **देवर्षिपितृतर्पणं कुर्यात्** । यदि पुनः शुचिः न[^४३३] तदावश्यं स्नायात् । **शुचि**ग्रहणेन शुद्धिहेतुतयात्र स्नानस्योपदिष्टत्वान् न स्नातकव्रतवत् तदनुष्ठेयम् । अत एव स्मृत्यन्तरे च स्नानं प्रतिषिद्धम् । स प्रतिषेधो मृदा स्नानस्य प्रसाधनलक्षणस्य । गौतमेन तु स्नानम् एवं विहितम्- "दण्द इवाप्सु परिप्लवते" (च्ड़्। आप्ध् १.२.३०) । मलापकर्षणं करनिघर्षणादिना न[^४३४] कर्तव्यम् । असत्य् अमेध्यादिसंसर्गे, न यत् स्वेदजं वस्त्ररेणुसंयोगादिसहजं मलं तद् अशुचित्वम् आपादयति । तद् धि नियतरूपम् एव । तथा च ब्राह्मणं "किं नु मलं किम् अजिनं किम् उ श्मश्रूणि किं तपः" (ऐत्ब् ७.१३) इति धर्मसाधनताम् एवंविधस्य मलधारणस्य दर्शयति ।


[^४३४]:
     J omits: na


[^४३३]:
     M G 1st ed.: punar na śuciḥ

- <u>कथं</u> पुनः स्नानस्य शौचार्थता प्रतीयते । न पुनः स्नातः शुचिश् चोभयविशिष्टो देवकार्ये विनियुज्यते । स्नातस्याशुचित्वाभावात्, कृतशौचाचमनादेः स्नानविधानात्, "स्नात्वा चाचान्तः पुनर् आचामेत्" (वध् ३.३८) इति च स्नातस्यापि शुचिर् इत्य् एतावता यादृशी सुद्धिस् तस्यां विज्ञायमानायां स्नानम् अपि सति निमित्ते प्राप्तं पुनर् उच्यते । स्मृत्यन्तरं चेदम् असत्य्[^४३५] अशुचित्वे निमित्ते प्रतिषेधार्थम् । तथा च "वेदम् अधीत्य स्नायात्" (बौग् २.५.६) इति समाप्ते स्वाध्यायविधौ प्रतिप्रसविष्यति । 


[^४३५]:
     M G: cedaṃ saty

- **कुर्याद् देवर्षिपितृतर्पणम्** । उदकदानं देवादिभ्यो गृहस्थधर्मेषु यद् उक्तं तादृशम् एव प्रतीयते, तर्पणशब्दसाहचर्यात् । "यद् एव तर्पयत्य् अद्भिः" (म्ध् ३.२८३) इति, तथा "देवतास् तर्पयति" (आश्ग् ३.४.१) इति गृह्यकारैर् उदकसाधनो ऽयं विधिर् उक्तः । उदकतर्पणम् इति चैतत् संविज्ञायते । ते देवा गृह्यकारैः पठिता अग्निप्रजापतिब्रह्मेत्यादयः । तेषां च तर्पणं न सौहित्योत्पादनम्, किं तर्हि तदुद्देशेनोदकाञ्जलिप्रक्षेपः । अतो ऽयम् उदकद्रव्यको याग एवोक्तो भवति । न ह्य् अन्यथा देवतात्वं भवति । यागसंप्रदानं हि सेति स्मर्यते, न तृप्तेः कर्त्री ।

- एतावद् धि देवतालक्षणम्- सूक्तभाजो हविर्भाजश् च देवताः । तत्र सूक्तं स्तुत्यतया भजन्ते, हविः संप्रदानतया । तर्प्यत्वेन चोदकदानसंप्रदानताम् एव गुणवृत्त्या वक्ति । गुर्वादिसंप्रदानं गवादिना तदुद्दिश्यमानस्वाम्येन[^४३६] प्रतीयते । देवतापि संप्रदानभूतः[^४३७] । संप्रदानत्वसाम्यात् तृप्यन्तीत्य् उच्यते । यदि देवतातृप्त्यर्थम् एतत् स्यात् तदा संस्कारकर्मोदकतर्पणं स्यात् । न च देवतानां संस्कार्यत्वोपपत्तिः । न हि ताः क्वचिद् उपयुक्ता उपयोक्ष्यन्ते वा । न चाकृताकरिष्यमाणकार्यस्य[^४३८] संस्कारतोपपत्तिः ।


[^४३८]:
     M G 1st ed.: na vā kṛtāḥ kariṣyamāṇakāryasya


[^४३७]:
     M G 1st ed.: saṃpradānam ataḥ; G 2nd ed.: saṃpradānabhūta


[^४३६]:
     M G 1st ed.: -mānaṃ svāmyena

- **ऋषयो** ये यस्यार्षेयाः । यथा पराशराणां वसिष्ठशक्तिपारशर्या इति[^४३९] । गृह्यकारैस् तु मन्त्रदृश ऋषयस् तर्पणीयत्वेनोक्ताः, मधुच्छन्दो गृत्समदो विश्वामित्र इति । अविशेषाभिधानाद् ऋषिशब्दस्योभये ऽपि प्राप्ताः । विशेषस्मृतित्वात् गृह्यस्मृतेस् त एव ग्रहीतुं न्याय्याः । 


[^४३९]:
     M G 1st ed.: vasiṣṭhaśāktapāraśaryeti; G 2nd ed.: vasiṣṭhaśaktipāraśaryeiti

- **पितरः** पूर्वप्रेताः पितृपितामहाः सपिण्डाः समानोदकाश् च । पितॄणां तर्पणं तर्पणम् एव । एतच् च श्राद्धविधौ प्रत्यक्षेण वक्ष्यते ।

- **देवताभ्यर्चनम्** । अत्र केचिच् चिरन्तना विचारयांचक्रुः- का एता देवता नाम यासाम् इदम् अभ्यर्चनम् उच्यते । यदि तावच् चित्रपुस्तकन्यस्तः चतुर्भुजो वज्रहस्त इत्याद्याः, प्रतिकृतय इति लौकिका व्यवहरन्ति । अतो गौणस् तत्र देवताव्यवहारः । अथ याः सूक्तहविःसंबन्धिन्यो वैदिकीभ्यश् चोदनाभ्यो मन्त्रवाक्येभ्यश् चावगम्यन्ते, शब्दार्थसंबन्धविदश् च स्मरन्ति "अग्निः अग्नीषोमौ मित्रावरुणौ इन्द्रो विष्णुः" इति । यद्य् एवं तत्क्रियासंबन्धितयैव तेषां देवतात्वं नार्थसंबन्धितया । तत्रापि यस्यैव हविषो या देवता तेन चोदिता तस्यैव सा भवति । तथा हि आग्नेयो ऽष्टाकपाल इत्य् आग्नेये पुरोडाशे देवता,[^४४०] न सौर्ये चरौ । अयं च तेषां निर्णयः- मुख्यासंभवाद् गौणस्यैव ग्रहणं न्याय्यम्, समाचाराच् च । अतः प्रतिमानाम् एवैतत् पूजाविधानम् । यच् चात्र तत्त्वं तद् "व्रतवद् देवदैवत्ये" इत्य् अत्र वक्ष्यामः (च्ड़्। म्ध् २.१८९) । 


[^४४०]:
     M G 1st ed.: āgneye devatāpuroḍāśe

- **समिदाधानं** सायम्प्रातर् अग्नौ दारुशकलप्रक्षेपणम् ॥ २.१७६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Everyday, ‘*having bathed and become pure*,’—*i.e*., having his
uncleanliness removed by bath,—‘*he should make offerings to Deities,
Sages and Fathers*.’ If he is already clean, he need not bathe; as the
adding of the term ‘clean’ clearly shows that the ‘bathing’ here laid
down is only for the purpose of cleanliness, and hence its performance
is absolutely compulsory, like the ‘bathing’ to be done by the
*Snālaka*, Accomplished Student. It is for this reason that in another
*Smṛti* bathing has been prohibited (for the Religious Student); though
this prohibition refers to bathing with clay, for purposes of personal
adornment. Gautama however has prescribed actual bathing. Hence what is
meant is that one should plunge into water like a stick, and he should
remove dirt, etc., by rubbing the body with his hauds. Unless there is
touching of an unolean thing, such dirt as arises from perspiration, or
from contact with the dust contained in the clothing, etc., does not
make one ‘unclean’; for the presence of such dirt is inevitable. Says
the Brāhmaṇa—‘What is *dirt*? Is it the skin, or hairs of the beard or
penance?’—which shows that the presence of such ‘dirt’ is conducive to
spiritual merit.

“How is it known that the *bathing* (here laid down) is for the purposes
of cleanliness?”

The present injunction cannot be taken as prompting, to the performance
of divine service, a person who fulfills the two distinct qualifications
of ‘having bathed’ and ‘become clean’;

\(1\) because as a matter of fact, one who has bathed can never remain
unclean;

\(2\) because even for a person who has adopted cleanliness by having
sipped water, etc., bathing is found to be enjoined;

\(3\) because we meet with such passages as ‘having bathed, sipped
water, one should sip water again,’ where even for the person who has
bathed a method of further cleanliness is enjoined.

From all this it is clear that what the present verse enjoins is that
whenever occasion (in the shape of the contact of unclean things, etc.)
arises, one should bathe, even though there be already present the
‘cleanliness’ that is generally understood as such.

Or, the present verse may be regarded as a totally independent rule,
intended to prohibit bathing without special occasion arising in the
shape of uncleanliness; and it is iu view of this, prohibition that we
have the counter-exception—‘one should bathe after having learnt the
Veda,’—which enjoins bathing at the end of Vedic Study (even in the
absence of any uncleanlincss).

“*He should make offerings to Deities*, *Sages and Fathers*.”—By reason
of the mention of ‘*tarpaṇa*,’ the ‘offering’ here meant appears to be
that offering of water to the Deities and others which has been
prescribed among the duties of the house-holder, under 3.283. The
authors of *Gṛhyasūtras* also have declared this act as to be done, with
water only; *e.g*., says Āśvalāyana (3.1.3)—‘He satisfies the Deities.’
Inordinary life also this act is known as the ‘offering of water.’

The Deities to whom this offering is to be made have been enumerated by
the writers on Gṛhya—*vis*., Agni, Prajāpati, Brahmā and so forth. The
‘*tarpaṇa*,’ ‘offering,’ to these does not consist of producing in them
the feeling of satisfaction (which is the etymological meaning of the
term ‘*tarpaṇa*’); it consists only in the pouring, on their behalf, of
water with joined hands. Hence what is here laid down comes to be only a
sacrificial offering, in which water is the substance offered. Specially
as the character of ‘deity’ could not otherwise have belonged to those
to whom the offering is made; for that alone has been called ‘deity’ to
whom a sacrifice is offered; it is not one who *becomes satisfied*. The
only definition of ‘deity’ that we have is—‘Deities are recipients of
hymns and recipients of offerings’; they become ‘recipients of hymns’ by
becoming the objects of eulogy, and they become ‘recipients of
offerings’ by becoming those to whom offerings are made. When therefore
our author speaks of them as ‘*tarpya*,’ ‘to be satisfied,’ he uses the
term in its figurative sense of ‘being recipients of the offering of
water.’ The teacher and such other persons are recognised as
‘recipients’ when the cow and such things are transferred to their
ownership; and the Deities also are ‘recipients.’ Thus both having the
common character of ‘being recipients,’ they are described as ‘being
satisfied.’ If what is laid down here meant actual ‘satisfying’ of the
Deities, then this^(:) water-offering’ would become a purely
sanctificatory act; and yet no ‘Sanctification’ is possible in the case
of Deities; for the simple reason that they have not been, nor are they
ever likely to lie, employed; and what has never been employed, or is
not likely to be employed, cannot rightly be regarded as an object of
sanctification.

‘*Sages*,’—*i.e*., those sages that happen to be one’s ‘*Gotra-ṛṣis*’;
*e.g*., for those belonging to the ‘Parāśara-gotra,’ Vaśiṣṭha, Śakti and
Pārāśarya would be the ‘sages’ (to whom the offering is to be made). The
author of *Gṛhyasūtras* have however spoken of the ‘seers of Vedic
Mantras’ (and not the *Gotra-ṛṣis*) as the ‘sages’ to whom the offering
is to be made; *i.e*., the sages Madhucchandas, Gṛtsamada and
Viśvāmitra. Since the text speaks of ‘sages’ without any qualification,
it is open to us to take it as standing for both kinds of sages; but in
view of the fact that the Gṛhyasūtras have specified them (as being the
‘seers of mantras’), it is only right to take these latter as meant.

‘*Fathers*.’—One’s dead ancestors,—father, grandfather, etc., all
*Sapiṇḍas* and *Samānodakas*. In the case of the ‘Fathers,’ the
‘offering’ is to be the actual ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ itself. This is going to be
distinctly laid down under the rules bearing upon *Śrāddha*.

*Worshiping of the Deities*.—In connection with this some ancient
writers have made the following observations:—“Who are these deities,
whose ‘worship’ is here laid down? If they are meant to be those pninted
in picture-books—figures with four arms, with a thunderbolt in the hand
and so forth,—then, since ordinary men regard these as ‘images’ (which
connotes *unreality*), they can be called ‘Deity,’ only figuratively.
If, on the other hand, they are meant to be those related to hymns and
offerings,—which are indicated by Vedic injunctions, and also by the
words of mantras, and which are called so by persons versed in the use
of words and their denotations,—such as ‘Agni,’ ‘Agni-Soma,’
‘Mitra-Varuṇa,’ ‘Indra,’ ‘Viṣṇu,’ and so forth—then, in that case, their
character of ‘Deity,’ would be dependent upon the said acts (of
offering, etc.), and not upon the fact of their having any connection
with the denotation (of the term ‘Deity’); and further, a particular
(Deity) would be the ‘Deity’ for only that offering which is enjoined as
to be offered to him; *e.g*., when the ‘Cake baked upon eight pans,’ is
called ‘*āgneya*’ (dedicated to Agni), Agni becomes the ‘deity’ only of
that cake, and not of that which is called ‘*saurya*’ (dedicated to
Sūrya).”

From the above considerations the conclusion that the ancient writers
have deduced is as follows:—In cases where the term cannot be. taken in
its direct denotation, it is only right to take it in the figurative
sense; specially as such is the actual usage. Hence the ‘worship’
enjoined in the present verse is that of *images*.

What the truth on this point is we shall explain below, under verse 189.

‘*Placing of fuel*’—throwing into the fire pieces of wood, every morning
and evening.—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Snātvā*’—“He should bathe for cleanliness, not for *pleasure*;
according to Gautama 2.8,2 and 9.61; Baudhāyana 1.2.3.39 and Viṣṇu
28.5”.—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 62);—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 117).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (28. 4, 5).—‘Both times, there should he bath and
fire-tending;—dipping in water like a wooden log.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (7.7).—‘With speech controlled, eating at the fourth, sixth
and eighth parts of the day,—he should go alms-begging.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.22).—‘Bathing with mantras dedicated to the deity
*Apas*, water-sprinkling, breath-control, praying to the Sun, and
repetition of the *Gāyatrī*.,—daily.’

*Gautama* (2.12, 14).—‘Fire-kindling, alms-begging;—bathing in water.’

*Yama* (*Aparārka*, p. 02).—‘With sleep, indolence, anger and his own
self under control, he shall avoid sleeping and sitting on the couch,
and the cleansing of the teeth; he shall sleep alone on kuśa-gass, and
shall never emit his semen anywhere.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

176	Every day, having bathed, and being purified, he must offer libations of water to the gods, sages and manes, worship (the images of) the gods, and place fuel on (the sacred fire).
</details>
