+++
title = "177 वर्जयेन् मधु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should abstain from honey, meat, scent, garland, flavours, women, all fermented acids and also the killing of living creatures.—(177)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मधु** सारघम् । माध्वीकस्य तु मद्यत्वात् प्राग् अप्य् उपनयनात् प्रतिषेधो "नित्यं मद्यं ब्राह्मणो वर्जयेत्" (च्ड़्। ग्ध् २.२०) इति । **मांसं** प्रोक्षिताद्य् अपि । **गन्ध**शब्देन सुरभित्वातिशययुक्तानि कर्पूरागुरुप्रभृतीनि द्रव्याणि संबन्धिलक्षणया प्रतिषिध्यन्ते । तेषाम् अनुलेपनाद्युपभोगप्रतिषेधः । गन्धस् तु स्वदेशान् निर्गत आगच्छतीत्य् अशक्यो निषेद्धुम् । तत्राप्य् आकस्मिकस्याप्य् अप्रतिषेधात्, भोगेच्छया त्व् अगुरुधूपादौ दोष एव । अत उपाध्यायेन चन्दनवृक्षादिच्छेदने नियुक्तस्य तद्गन्धस्याघ्राणे वस्तुस्वभावत उत्पद्यमाने न दोषः । माल्यसाहचर्याच् चेदृशो गन्धः प्रतीयते । यस् तु नेदृशो हृदयोन्मादकरः कुष्ठघृतपूतिदार्वादिगन्धस् तस्याप्रतिषेधः[^४४१] । **माल्यं** कुसुमं ग्रथितम् । **रसाः** मधुराम्लादयः ।


[^४४१]:
     M G 1st ed,: tasya pratiṣedhaḥ

- <u>ननु</u> च नीरसस्य भोज्यत्वासंबवात् प्राणवृत्तिर् एव न स्यात् । <u>सत्यम्</u> । उद्रिक्तरसाः केवला गुडादयो निषिध्यन्ते । संस्कारकरणे द्रव्यान्तर्गतानाम् अपि प्रतिषेधः । अथ वात्यन्तरसिनः संस्कृतस्यान्नस्य सक्तिप्रतिषेधो[^४४२] ऽयम् । यथोक्तम्- 


[^४४२]:
     M G 1st ed.: vātyantamasaṃskṛtasyānnasya uktipratiṣedho

- यो ऽहेर् इव धनाद् भीतो मिष्टान्नाच् च विषाद् इव ।

- राक्षसीभ्य इव स्त्रीभ्यः स विद्याम् अधिगच्छति ॥ इति । (म्स्सं ४१२१)

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु शृङ्गारादीन् मन्यन्ते । नाटकादिप्रेक्षणेन काव्यश्रवणेन वा रसपुष्टिर् न कर्तव्या[^४४३] । अन्येषां तु दर्शनम्, इक्ष्वामलकादीनां यो ऽन्तर्द्रवरूपोदकवत् स रसस् तस्य निष्पीडितस्य पृथक् कृतस्य[^४४४] प्रतिषेधो न पुनस् तदन्तर्गतस्य । <u>तच् चैतद् अयुक्तम्</u> । न हि रसशब्दो द्रवपर्यायः प्रसिद्धः । यत्र च यस्योचितम् उपभोगान्तत्वं तद् एव तस्य निषिध्यते । तेन मधुमांस्योर् भोजने प्रतिषेधः, न दर्शनस्पर्शनयोः । गन्धमाल्यस्यापि सरीरमण्डनाभिमानतयोपादानं निषिध्यते, न तु कथंचिद् धस्तादिना ग्रहणम् । एवं स्त्रियो मैथुनसंबन्धेन । तदाशङ्कयैव च प्रेकणालम्भौ निषेत्स्यति । तथा च गौतमः- "स्त्रीप्रेक्षणालम्भने मैथुनशङ्कायाम्" इति (ग्ध् २.१६) ।


[^४४४]:
     M G omit: pṛthak kṛtasya


[^४४३]:
     M G 1st ed.: vaktavyā; G 2nd ed.: vartavyā

- **शुक्तानि** प्राप्ताम्लरसानि[^४४५] केवलात् परिवासाद् द्रव्यान्तरसंसर्गाद् वाम्लताम् आपन्नानि । तेषां च द्विजातिधर्मत्वाद् एव सिद्धः प्रतिषेधः । पुनर्ग्रहणं गौणशुक्तपरिग्रहणार्थम् । तेन रूक्षपरुषा वाचो निषिद्धा भवन्ति । यद् उक्तं गौतमेन "शुक्ता वाचः"इति (ग्ध् २.१९), तद् इदं सर्वग्रहणं चास्यैवार्थस्याविष्करणार्थम् । रसशुक्तान्य् अनूद्य **सर्वाणीति** विधीयते । ततो गौणपरिग्रहः सिद्धो भवति ।


[^४४५]:
     M G 1st ed.: prāptāsvarasāni

- <u>ये त्व्</u> एवं व्याचक्षते शुक्तशब्देन रसप्रतिषेधः सर्वशब्देनामानसानि[^४४६] वचांसि, त इदं प्रष्टव्याः । अर्थप्रतिषिद्धानां प्रतिषेधार्थं सर्वग्रहणं कस्मान् न भवति । तथा सति च दध्यादेः शुक्तीभूतस्य प्रतिषेधः प्राप्नोति । यदि तु प्राप्तिम् आश्रित्य पुनः प्रतिषेध उक्तार्थो व्याख्यायते, तथा सति न कश्चिद् दोषः ।


[^४४६]:
     M G: sarvaśabdena mānasāni

- **प्राणिनां** मशकमक्षिकादीनां बाल्याद् **धिंसने** प्राप्ते यत्नतः परिहारार्थं पुनः प्रतिषेधः । स्वाध्यायविध्यङ्गत्वार्थो वा । न केवलं हिंसायां पुरुषार्थप्रतिषेधातिक्रमो[^४४७] यावत् स्वाध्यायविध्यर्थातिक्रमो ऽपि । शुक्तादिष्व् अप्य् एवं कस्मान् न कल्प्यत इति चेद् अस्ति तत्र विषयान्तरे सावकाशत्वम्, एकरूपस्य विषयस्य व्यर्थत्वं सति गत्यन्तरे गरीयः ॥ २.१७७ ॥


[^४४७]:
     M G: puruṣārthaḥ pratiṣedhātikramo
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Madhu*’—stands for the *honey* produced by bees. As for *wine* (which
also is called ‘madhu’), it is an intoxicant; and hence its use is
prohibited even before the Upanayana: ‘The Brāhmaṇa should ever abstain
from intoxicants’—says Gautama (2.20).

‘*Meat*,’—even such as has been offered (to deities And fathers).

The term ‘*scent*’ stands for camphor and such other things as are of
extremely sweet scent,—the name of the quality (scent) being used
figuratively for things possessed of it. All highly perfumed substances
are prohibited, and what is prohibited is the applying of these perfumes
to the body; as for the scent itself, when it proceeds from the fragrant
substance, it cannot, be checked. Nor does the prohibition apply to the
case where the perfume reaches the student by chance. What is
reprehensible therefore is the intentional using of fragrant incense and
such things as luxury. It is for this reason that there.is nothing
reprehensible in the case where the pupil is told by his Teacher to cut
a Sandal-tree and the sweet smell of the wood reaches him it its natural
way. It Is by reason of its being mentioned along with ‘garland’ that we
take it to mean *strong scent*. That which is not strong enough to
exhilarate the mind,—*e.g*., the smell of such things as *Kuṣṭha, Ghṛta,
Pūtidāru*, etc.—is not prohibited.

‘*Garland*’—flowers strung together.

‘*Flavours*’—Sweet, acid and the rest.

“Since things absolutely devoid of flavour could not be eaten, living
itself would be impossible (if one were to avoid all flavours).”

True; but what are prohibited are highly tasty things, like sugar. This
prohibition applies also to such substances as are mixed with other
things, by way of condiments. Or, the prohibition may apply to too much
indulgence in too richly cooked and tasty food. To the same end we have
the following saying—‘He alone acquires learning who shuns wealth like
serpent, sweets like poison and women like demonesses.’

Others explain ‘*rasa*,’ ‘*flavour*,’ to stand for the poetic emotions,
Erotic and the rest; the sense being that one should not arouse his
emotions by witnessing dramatic performances or listening to poetical
recitations.

Others again have held the view that the prohibition applies to the
pieces of sugar-cane, *Dhātri* and such other substances, when extracted
and separated from them,—and not as contained within them.

This however is not right; the term ‘*rasa*’ is not known as symonymous
with ‘fluid.’

As a matter of fact, what is prohibited with regard to each of the
things named is its enjoyment, in whatever form this may be possible.
For instance, of honey and meat, what is prohibited is the *eating*, and
not the seeing or touching; of scent and garland, what is prohibited is
using them with the idea of adorning the body, and not merely holding
them by the hand; similarly in the case of women, it is sexual
intercourse that is prohibited; and it is by reason of there being a
fear of such’intercourse following that the author is going to prohibit
later on, the looking at, and touching of, women. As says Gautama
(2.16)—‘The looking at, and touching of women (are reprehensible), for
fear of its leading to actual intercourse.’

‘*Fermented acids*’—such things as turn acid; that is those that turn
acid either by being kept overnight, or by being mixed with other
substances. Such substances are prohibited by reason of the avoiding of
these being among the duties of all twice-born persons; and yet it has
been re-iterated here for the purpose of including all those things that
are named ‘acid’ only figuratively; it is thus that ‘harsh words’ become
prohibited. Says Gautama—‘Acid words (should be avoided).’ It is for the
purpose of including all this that the author has added the epithet
‘all.’ This epithet ‘all’ is meant to refer to ‘flavours’ and ‘acids.’
It is thus that the figurative use becomes established.

Some people offer the following explanation:—“The term ‘acid’ prohibits
the acid flavours, and the term ‘all’ prohibits unpleasant words.”

These people should be asked the following question:—Why cannot the
epithet ‘all’ be taken as prohibiting those things that are prohibited
only by implication r In this way we could obtain the prohibition of
curds and like things which have turned acid. If however the prohibition
(by ‘all’) be explained as referring to things whose use is
possible,—then there can be no objection to it.

‘*Of living creatures*,’—such as insects and fleas; the killing of these
is done through childishness; hence we have the present prohibition with
a view to emphasise the necessity of making special efforts to avoid it.
Or, the re-iteration of the prohibition may be meant to be indicative of
the fact that the avoidance of killing is auxiliary to ‘Vedic Study.’ So
that the *killing* would involve the transgression, not only of the
prohibition calculated for the benefit of the agent, but also that of
the due observance of the injunction of Vedic Study.

“Why is not the same assumption made regarding the *fermented acids* and
other things also?”

The prohibition of the *acids*, etc., is such as has room for it in
other cases also \[ *e.g*. Harsh words are prohibited for other people
and under other circumstances also; the prohibition of killing has no
such room for application, since it is necessary during sacrificial
performances\]. And when between two things it is found that one becomes
absolutely null and void, while there is still room for the other, then
preference is given to the former.—(177)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Rasān*’—“Molasses and the like’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘clarified butter, oil and the like’ (Nandana);—‘sweet, acid
and the rest;—*i.e*. very richly flavoured food’ (Medhātithi, who also
notes one‘other’ explanation, *juices of sugar-cane, tamarind and other
fruits*, which he rejects);—Nārāyaṇa mentions one explanation, ‘poetic
sentiments’.

This is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 456), along with the next
two verses and a half, as enumerating the things to be avoided by the
Student;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 494), which adds the notes:
‘*Rasān*’ stands for the juices of sugar-cane and other things;—even
though *Honey* also is a juice, yet it has been mentioned separately in
view of the heavier expiatory rites prescribed for the transgressors of
the rule prohibiting it.

The verse is quoted also in *Madanopārjāta* (p. 39) as enumerating the
things prohibited for the Student;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 62);—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 42);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 125),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Rasa*’ stands for the sugar-cane juice
and the rest; though ‘*madhu*’ also is a ‘*rasa*,’ yet it is mentioned
separately with a view to indicate that the taking of it involves a
heavier expiation.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 177-179)  
**

*Gautama* (2.19).—‘He should abstain from honey, meat, scents, garland
and the like, sleeping during the day, anointing, riding on conveyances,
applying collyrium, wearing shoes, umbrella, attachment, anger, avarice,
delusion, wrangling, bathing, teeth-cleansing, rejoicing, dancing,
singing, calumniating and dangers.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.23-26).—‘Avoiding saline salts, honey and
meat; not using scents;—he should never have recourse to sexual
intercourse;—free from anger, and jealousy.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1-33).—‘Honey, meat, collyrium, eating of leavings,
fermented acids, woman, killing of living creatures, gazing at the Sun,
indecent talk and so forth,—these he shall avoid.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (2.5).—‘He should avoid honey, meat, collyrium,
sitting on a raised seat, approaching women, lying, taking what is not
given.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3.1,16.25).—‘Sexual intercourse, dramatic acting,
scents, collyrium, honey and meat, anger, lying, sleeping on raised bed,
bathing, scratching of ground, teeth-washing, feet-washing, use of the
razor, riding on conveyances yoked with bulls, wearing of shoes within
the village,—he shall avoid.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.2.25).—‘Dancing, singing, playing on musical
instruments, scents, garlands, shoes, holding of umbrella,
anointing,—these he shall avoid.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.11).—‘He should abstain from śrāddhas, artificial salts,
fermented acids, food kept over-night, dancing, singing, women, honey,
meat, collyrium, eating of leavings, killing of animals, indecencies.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 495).—‘He shall abstain from riding
on horses and elephants and oxen, walking over funeral pyres, ascending
trees, much talking, passing through crevices and openings, crossing of
large rivers and oceans, dangerous positions.’

*Kūrma-Purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava).—‘He shall not look at the mirror; he
shall not cleanse his teeth; the leavings of his teacher also he shall
use as a medicine, not with an eager longing for them.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

177	Let him abstain from honey, meat, perfumes, garlands, substances (used for) flavouring (food), women, all substances turned acid, and from doing injury to living creatures.
</details>
