+++
title = "182 उदकुम्भं सुमनसो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should fetch the jar of water, flowers, cowdung, earth and kuśa-grass,—as much as may be required; and day by day he should beg for alms.—(182)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यावद्भिर् अर्थः** प्रयोजनम् उपाध्यायस्य सिध्यति तावद् **उदकुम्भादि आहरेत्** । प्रदर्शनार्थं चैतत् । अन्यद् अपि गृहोपयोगि यद् अगर्हितं कर्म तत् कुर्यात् । गर्हितं गुरुव्यतिरेकेणोच्छिष्टापमार्जनादि न कारयितव्य इत्य् एवमर्थो ऽयं श्लोकः । यतः सामान्येन शुश्रूषा गुरौ विहिता । यावान् अर्थ एषाम् इति विग्रहः । 

- **भैक्षं चाहर् अहश् चरेत्** । सिद्धम् अन्नम् अत्यन्ताल्पं यात्राविषयं **भैक्षम्** अत्रोच्यते । "नैकान्नादी" इति[^४५६] (म्ध् २.१८८) प्रतिषेधे ऽन्नशब्दोपादानाद् अन्नं प्रतीयते । "समाहृत्य भैक्षं निवेद्याश्नीयात्" (च्ड़्। म्ध् २.५१) इति सामानाधिकरण्यात् सिद्धान्नप्रतिपत्तिः । शुष्के ह्य् अन्ने भिक्षिते कुतस् तस्याशनम् । समाहृत्य गुरुगृहे पच्यमानस्य भैक्षप्रकृतिता स्यान् न भैक्षता । प्रसिद्ध्या चेदृशम् एव भैक्षम् उच्यते । **अहर् अहः** । <u>ननु</u> "बैक्षेण वर्तयेन् नित्यम्" (म्ध् २.१८८) इत्य् एतस्माद् एव सुद्धम् अहर् अहश् चरणं सिध्यति । <u>वृत्तिविधानार्थं</u> नित्यग्रहणम् । पर्युषितेनापि घृतादिस्नेहसंयुक्तेन स्याद् वृत्तिस् तदर्थम् इदम्- अहर् अहर् भिक्षित्वाशितव्यम् । न पुनर् एकस्मिन्न् अहनि भिक्षितम् अपरेद्युः परिवास्य यत् किंचित् स्नेहयुक्तम् इति प्रतिप्रसवेन भुञ्जीत ॥ २.१८२ ॥


[^४५६]:
     M G 1st ed.: naikānnādi (omits iti); G 2nd ed.: naikānnādīni

_येभ्यो भैक्षम् आसादयितव्यं तान् वक्ति ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

He should fetch as much of water in jars and other things as might serve
the purposes of the Teacher.

This is only by way of illustration; the meaning being that he should do
other household-work also,—all that is not absolutely demeaning. What
this verse is meant to indicate is that the pupil should not be made to
do any demeaning work,—such as touching the utensils in which food has
been eaten by persons other than the Teacher himself. For as regards the
Teacher himself, his service has been already prescribed in a general
way.

The compound ‘*yāvadarthāni*’ is to be expounded as ‘*yāvān arthaḥ
eṣām*.’

‘*Day by day he should beg for alms*’;—‘alms’ here stands for a very
small quantity of *cooked*, just enough for sustenance. It would not be
right to argue that it stands for *food in general* (not necessarily
*cooked*); since the generic term ‘*anna*’ (food) is found to be used in
the prohibition coming later on (in 188) regarding ‘the *food* of one
person’; because in view of the injunction ‘having collected the alms,
he should present it to the Teacher and then eat it,’ where the
*bringing* and *eating* are mentioned together, it is clear that
*cooked* food is meant; if dry grains had been brought in, how could
they be eaten forthwith? If the grain were collected and then cooked in
the Teacher’s house, the food thus cooked would be one that has the
*alms* for its source, it would not be the *aims* itself. In common
usage also it is *cooked food* that is called ‘alms.’

‘*Day by day*.’—“The daily *begging for alms* is already implied in what
follows later on (in 188)—‘He should live every day on alms.’

In 188, the term ‘every day’ has been added for the purpose of laying
down the means of subsistence; while the term ‘day by day’ in the
present verse is meant to preclude the possibility of some one keeping
the food mixed with butter, etc., overnight and then eating it next day;
the sense being that he should beg for alms and eat it *day by day*; and
he should never beg on one day and then, having kept it over-night, eat
it next day after mixing it with butter, etc—(182)

The Author next mentions the persons from whom the alms are to be
begged.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśatramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 394), as
laying down what should be done by the Religious Student, in the event
of a ‘wet dream—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 39);—in *Aparārka* (p. 1141);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 127) as showing that unintentional
emission involves only an expiation;—and in *Prāyoscittaviveka* (p.
462).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.4.13.14).—‘Morning and evening he should
fetch jars of water; every day fetching fuel from the forest, he should
keep it on the ground.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (22.5).—‘He should beg alms morning and
evening.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (5.2.27).—‘Wearing of the girdle, begging of alms,
carrying of the staff, fetching of fuel, bathing in water, and
morning-salutation,—these are the daily obligatory duties.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

182	Let him fetch a pot full of water, flowers, cowdung, earth, and Kusa grass, as much as may be required (by his teacher), and daily go to beg food.
</details>
