+++
title = "186 दूराद् आहृत्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having fetched fuel-sticks from a distance, he should place them in the air; and with these he should, without fail, make offerings to the fire, morning and evening.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दूर**ग्रहणम् अपरिगृहीतदेशोपलक्षणार्थम् । ग्रामात् किल दूरम् अरण्यम्, न च तत्र कस्यचित् परिग्रहः । अनुपलक्षणे हि दूरार्थे कियद् दूरम् इत्य् अनवस्थितः शास्त्रार्थः स्यात् । **आहृत्य** आनीय । **संनिदध्यात्** स्थापयेत् । **विहायसि** गृहस्योपरि । न हि निरालम्बने ऽन्तरिक्षे निधानं संभवति । **ताभिः सायंप्रातर् जुहुयात्** । आहरणं तु तात्कालिकम् अन्यदा वेच्छया । विहायसि[^४६०] निधानम् अदृष्टार्थम् इत्य् आहुः । <u>अन्ये</u> तु ब्रुवते संप्रत्यानीय्मानं वृक्षाद् दारु आर्द्रं भवतीति, गृहस्योपरि अन्यस्य वा प्रकारादेस् तत एवावगन्तव्यम् ॥ २.१८६ ॥


[^४६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: vihāyasa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*distance*’ is meant to stand for such plots of land as are
not owned by any one; for instance, the forest is ‘distant’ from the
village, and it is not owned by any one. If such were not the meaning,
and ‘distance’ simply meant ‘remote places,’—then since the exact degree
of remoteness is not specified, the manning of the injunction would
remain indefinite.

‘*Having fetched*’—having brought.

‘*Should place*’—should keep.

‘*In the air*’—*i.e*., on the roof of the house; no placing is possible
in the open air, without some support.

‘*With* *these* *he should make offerings morning and evening*.’

The fetching of the fuel may he at that or at any other time, according
as the student pleases.

Some people regard the ‘placing in the air’ as serving some
transcendental purpose. Others have however held that the fuel brought
fresh from the tree is wet; and hence it is necessary to place it either
on the top of the house or on that of a wall, etc. (for the purpose of
drying).—(186)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vihāyasi*’—In the air, *i*. *e*. on the roof of the house (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja and Kullūka);—‘on a platform’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘in the open air
(Nandana);—‘in any pure place except the ground’ (Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 451), as laying
down the method of ‘tending the fire’, and ‘explains it that ‘he should
place the fuel somewhere in the open, not on the grouhd;’—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 936) as laying down the morning and evening offerings
into the Fire;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 448), where ‘*dūrāt*’ is
explained as from a spot not owned by any one’;—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p.
498), where *vihāyasi* is explained as ‘*antarīkṣe*’ ‘in the open air—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 24), where ‘*dūrāt*’ is explained as ‘from a spot
not owned by any other person’, and ‘*vihāyasi*’ as ‘*maṇḍapādau*’ ‘oh
an altar or some such place’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 43), which says
that, according to *Dharmaprakāśa*, ‘*vihāyasi*’ means ‘on the
house-top’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 86), which explains
*dūrāt*, as ‘from places not belonging to any person’, and *vihāyasi* as
‘on the house-top’,—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 34a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.4.16).—‘Having kindled fire and swept the
place, he should lay fuel on it, morning and evening, in accordance with
instructions received.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 448).—‘He should not
go for fetching fuel in the evening.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.4).—‘Both times, bathing and fire-tending.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (2.22.6).—‘Morning and evening, he should fetch
fuel.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (2.5.9)—‘Without causing injury, he should fetch
fuel from the forest, lay it on the fire and then utter speech.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3-2-27).—‘Girdle-wearing, alms-begging,
staff-carrying, fuel-fetching, water-bathing, morning salutation,—these
are the daily compulsory duties.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.2.54).—‘Therefore, the Religious Student should fetch
fuel.’

*Āpastamba* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 448).—‘Some people say that
Fire-kindling should be done in the evening only.’ *Laugākṣi*
(Do.)—(same as above).

*Baijavāpa* (Do.).—‘Before sunset, and also in the morning, going
northward, without causing injury, he should fetch fuel,—wet, if
desirous of food; dry, if desirous of Brahmic glory; both, if desirous
of both.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 452).—‘The fuel should he of Palāśa;
in the absence of that, Khadira or Śamī or Rohitaka or Aśvattha; and in
the absence of these, Arka and Vetasa.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

186	Having brought sacred fuel from a distance, let him place it anywhere but on the ground, and let him, unwearied, make with it burnt oblations to the sacred fire, both evening and morning.
</details>
