+++
title = "188 भैक्षेण वर्तयेन्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The avowed student should subsist on alms; he should not (habitually) eat the food given by one person. for the student, subsisting on alms has been declared to be equal to fasting.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>ननु</u> च "भैक्षम् अहर् अहश् चरेत्" (म्ध् २.१८२) इति श्रुतम् एवैतत् । एवं हि भैक्षचर्या दृष्टार्था भवति । <u>उक्तं</u> च "निवेद्य गुरवे ऽश्नीयात्" (म्ध् २.५१) इति । न च तदशनं भैक्षसंस्कारः येन वृत्त्यर्थः स्यात् ।

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः- अनूद्यते नैकान्नादी भवेद् व्रतीति वक्तुम् । 

- <u>एतद्</u> अप्य् असत्, भैक्षशब्देनैवैकान्नादनस्य निषेधात् । भिक्षाणां समूहो भैक्षम् उच्यते । ततः कुत एकान्नादनप्राप्तिः । तस्य पित्र्येभ्यो ऽनुज्ञानार्थं[^४६५] सर्वम् एतद् अनूद्यते । **बैक्षेण वर्तयेद्** अत्मानं भैक्षभोजनेन पालयेत् । जीवितस्थितिं[^४६६] कुर्यान् नैकस्य संबन्धि अन्नम् अद्यान् नैकभिक्षान्नं भुञ्जीत ।


[^४६६]:
     M G 1st ed.: jīvitaḥ sthitiṃ


[^४६५]:
     M G 1st ed.: pitrye 'bhyanujñānārthaṃ

- न पुनर् इयम् आशङ्का कर्तव्या "नैकस्वामिकं भुञ्जीत, अपि तु बहुस्वामिकम् अविभक्तभ्रातृसंबन्धि" । एकस्यान्नम् एकं वान्नम् एकान्नम्, तद् अत्ति भुङ्के **एकान्नादी** । **व्रती** ब्रह्मचारी । प्रकर्णाद् एव लब्धः, श्लोकपूरणार्थो व्रतिशब्दः । 

- अत्रार्थवादः[^४६७] । **भैक्षेणैव** केवलेन व्रतिनो या वृत्तिः शरीरधारणम् उपवासतुल्यफला सा वृत्तिः स्मर्यते ॥ २.१८८ ॥


[^४६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: arthavādaḥ; both M and G connect this with vratiśabdaḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Objection*.—“It has already been laid down that he should go about
begging alms every day (183).”

What is there said would show that the begging of Alms is meant to serve
the visible purpose (of sustaining the body); specially as it has been
subsequently laid down that ‘having offered it to the Teacher, he should
eat it’; and this ‘*eating*’ cannot be sanctificatory of the alms; which
alone could prevent us from taking it as serving the purely visible
purpose of sustaining the body.

Some people have explained that the re-iteration of the ‘daily begging
of alms’ is made for the purpose of adding the further direction that
‘he should not eat the food given by one person.’

But this is not right. Since the eating of the food given by one person
is precluded by the term ‘alms’ itself. ‘Alms’ stands for *an aggregate
of what is obtained* *by* *begging*; whence then could there be any
possibility of eating the food given by one person?

The conclusion on this point is that the whole rule has been re-iterated
here with a view to adding (in the next verse) that such eating of the
food given by one person is permissible at *Śrāddhas*.

‘*He should subsist on alms*’;—he should nourish his body—sustain his
life—by means of food obtained by begging; and he should not eat food
received from a single person.

The verse should not be taken to mean that “he should not eat what
belongs to a single person,—he should eat what belongs to several
owners; *e.g*., what belongs to several undivided brothers.” For the
word in the text means simply ‘one who eats one food—or one person’s
food.’

The term ‘*Vrati*’ here stands for the Religious Student; and as the
fact of the rule pertaining to him is clear from the context, the
addition of the word can be taken only as filing up the metre.

Next follows the commendatory statement:—‘The subsisting—sustaining of
the body—of the student on alms only has been declared to be equal to
fasting.’—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
454) in support of the view that the Student should not accept food from
one and the same house day after day; and adds that this is meant to
apply to normal times; in abnormal times it is not meant to be strictly
adhered to; this on the strength of Yājñavalkya’s declaration (1. 32.)

The same work quotes the second half of the verse on p. 485, as
declaring the reward accruing to the Student from strictly following the
rules of alms-begging.

The whole verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 498) as prohibiting
the habit of seeking for food from one and the same person regularly;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 61);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 111),
which says that this refers to *normal* times, not to abnormal times of
distress.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 2.188-189)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.32).—‘The student firm in his vow should not, except in
times of distress, habitually eat food given by a single person; at a
Śrāddha the Brāhmana may eat when he likes, without injuring his vow.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

188	He who performs the vow (of studentship) shall constantly subsist on alms, (but) not eat the food of one (person only); the subsistence of a student on begged food is declared to be equal (in merit) to fasting.
</details>
