+++
title = "208 बालः समान-जन्मा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whether he be younger, or of equal age, or a student of sacrificial ritual,—the Teacher’s son, imparting instruction, dfserves the same honour as the Teacher.—(208)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>ये न</u> पठन्ति गुरुपुत्रविशेषणार्थं पूर्वत्राचार्यग्रहणम्, तेषाम् अध्यापयितरि गुणवति समानजातीये सर्वगुरुवृत्तिः प्राप्तानेन विशेषेणावस्थाप्यते । **अध्यापयन् गुरुसुतो गुरुवन् मानं** पूजाम् **अर्हति,** नानाध्यापयन् ।

- <u>ननु</u> च विद्याग्रहणनिमित्तत्वाद् गुरुवृत्तिर् अध्यापयद् गुरुवद् गुरुपुत्रे ऽप्य् अध्यापयितरि प्राप्तैव । शैशवब्राह्मणनिदर्शनात् कनीयसो ऽपि सिद्धेत्य् अतो **बालः** **समानजन्मा वा** इत्य् एवमर्थम् अपि न वक्तव्यम् ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । यो वेदं वेदैकदेशं वाध्यापयति तस्यानाचार्यस्याप्य् एषा वृत्तिर् उक्ता । अयं तु न ग्राहकः, केवलं कतिचिदहान्य् अहर्भागं वाध्यापयति, अतो नाचार्यो नोपाध्याय इत्य् अप्राप्तौ विधिर् अयम् । अस्माद् एव वचनाद् अन्यस्य भग्नमन्त्रादेर् अध्यापकस्य न सर्वा गुरुवृत्तिः कर्तव्येति विज्ञायते । 

- <u>ये च</u> पूर्वत्राचार्यशब्दं पठन्ति तेषाम् उत्तरार्थम् इदम् अनूद्यते । "उत्सादनं च" (म्ध् २.२०९) इति वक्ष्यति । 

- **शिष्यो वा यज्ञकर्मणि** । यज्ञकर्मग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम् । क्वचिद् अङ्गे वेदैकदेशे मन्त्रभागे कस्मिंश्चिद् ब्राह्मणभागे वा, तथापि गुरुवत् पूज्यः यदि तु गुरुपुत्रः । तस्माद् अनेन प्रकारेण कांचिद् विद्यां शिक्षेत, तदा तेन तस्मिन् गुरुवद् वर्तितव्यम् इत्य् उक्तम्, एवम् अर्थवादत्वाद् अस्यारम्भस्य । 

- <u>ये तु</u> व्याचक्षते- **अध्यापयन्न्** इत्य् अनेनाध्यापनसामर्थ्यं लक्ष्यते, अध्यापनसमर्थश् चेद् अध्यापयतु, मा वाध्यापयेत्, गृहीतवेदश् चेद् गुरुवद् द्रष्टव्यः — तेषाम् शाब्दम् एतद् व्याख्यानं सत्यं भवति । शता लक्षणार्थः, स तु क्रियायाः "लक्षणहेत्वोः क्रियायाः" (पाण् ३.२.१२६) इति । क्रिया चात्र श्रुता- **गुरुवन् मानम् अर्हति** ॥ २.२०८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For those persons who do not adopt, the reading whereby the term
‘*ācārya*’ (teacher) is made the qualification of the ‘Teacher’s son’ in
the preceding verse,—it would follow that the entire treatment of the
Teacher is to he accorded to the Teacher’s son who is qualified and
belongs to the same caste, even though he may not have done any
teaching. And it is this wide rule that is restricted by the present
verse.—It is only the Teacher’s son imparting instruction that deserves
the same honour as the Teacher,—and not he who does not impart
instruction.

“That the Teacher’s son who imparts instruction should be honoured like
the teacher follows from the mere fact of instruction having been
received from him; and from what we read in connection with the story
relating to the infant (*vide* 151 above) the propriety of similar
treatment of the junior is already known; so that even for the mention
of the ‘younger or of equal age’ the present verse would not be
required.”

True; what has been said before is the treatment to be accorded to one
who teaches the Veda, or even a portion of the Veda,—even though he be
not the regular preceptor; while the person referred to here is not one
who has made one get up the Veda; it is only one who teaches for a few
days or even for a part of the day. And since such a person would not be
either a ‘Preceptor’ or a ‘sub-teacher,’ his honouring would not be
included under what has gone before; so it becomes necessary to enjoin
it in the present connection.

It is from this verse that we understand that the entire treatment of
the Teacher is not to be accorded to one who teaches only broken parts
of a *manṭra*.

For those however who read ‘*ācārya*,’ ‘who does the work of teaching’
in the preceding verse,—the present verse would be a mere reference to
what has been enjoined before, for the purpose of adding the injunction
occurring in the next verse.

‘*Or a student of sacrificial ritual*’;—the mention of ‘sacrificial
ritual’ is only by way of illustration; the meaning is that even though
he be a mere student of a subsidiary science, or of a portion of the
Veda—*Mantra* portion or the Brāhamaṇa portion,—yet he deserves to be
honoured like the teacher; only if he happens to be the teacher’s son
and imparts instruction in some science, he should be honoured like the
teacher. Though this has been already said (in the preceding verse) yet
that does not matter, as the present verse is meant to be merely
re-iterative.

Some people offer the following explanation:—“The phrase ‘*imparting
instruction*’ stands for the *capacity of teaching*; the sense being
that if the teacher’s son has learnt the Vedas and is capable of
teaching it, he should be honoured like the teacher;—whether he actually
docs the work of teaching or not.”

This explanation is verbally quite correct. The Present Participal affix
(in ‘*adhyāpayan*,’ ‘imparting instruction’) has the sense of
*characterisation*; and this characterisation is that of an act; so that
the use is in accordance with Pāṇini 3.2.128; and the *act* is directly
mentioned as that ‘*deserving* *the same honour as the teacher*.’—(208)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Yajñakarmaṇi*’—Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa construe this with
‘*śiṣyaḥ*’, and explain the phrase ‘*Yajñakarmaṇi śiṣyaḥ*’ as ‘student
of sacrificial ritual (and other Vedic subsidiaries)’;—Nandana construes
it with ‘*adhyāpayan*’, explaining the phrase as ‘who imparts
instruction in sacrificial ritual—Kullūka and Rāghavānanda take it by
itself, explaining it as ‘who happens to be present *at a sacrificial
performance*’.

‘*Adhyāpayan*’—‘Teaching’ (Medhātithi); ‘Having the capacity to teach’
(Kullūka, also Vīramitrodaya).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 462) where
‘*adhyāpayan*’ is explained as ‘capable of teaching’; and the
construction is explained as *yajñakarmaṇi guruvanmānamarhati*’—*i.e*.,
‘at a sacrificial performance, he deserves to be honoured like the
Teacher’;—thus agreeing on all points with the explanation given by
Kullūka.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 208-209)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (28.31-33).—‘One should behave towards the teacher’s son who
imparts instruction to him just as he would towards the teacher
himself,—whether he be younger than him or of the same age;—he should
not wash his feet;—nor should he eat his leavings.’

*Gautama* (2.38,39).—‘He should behave similarly towards ṭhe teacher’s
wife and his sons;—but should not eat his leavings, or bathe him, or
dress his hair, or wash his feet, or rub his body, or clasp his feet.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.2.37).—‘Towards the teacher’s son, or towards the
expounder of the Veda, one should behave similarly, with the exception
of eating his leavings.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.7.30).—‘I he behaviour towards the teacher’s
son should be like that towards the teacher himself,—with the exception
of eating the leavings.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

208	The son of the teacher who imparts instruction (in his father's stead), whether younger or of equal age, or a student of (the science of) sacrifices (or of other Angas), deserves the same honour as the teacher.
</details>
