+++
title = "220 तञ् चेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the sun should rise or set while he is still sleeping, either intentionally or unintentionally, he should fast during the day, reciting. (the Sāvitrī).—(220)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्रेदं प्रायश्चित्तं चरेत् । ब्रह्मचारिणं **शयानं** निद्रावशं गतम्[^५४०] **अभ्युदियात्** स्वेनोदयेनाभिव्याप्तदोषं कुर्यात् । "**अभिर् अभागे**" (पाण् १.४.९१) इति कर्मप्रवचनीयत्वम् । ततो द्वितीया **शयानम्** इति । इत्थंभूतं सुप्तम् इति लक्षणं वा स्वापकाले यद्य् उद्येत । **जपन्न् उपवसेद् दिनम्** ।


[^५४०]:
     M G 1st ed.: nidrāvagatam; G 2nd ed.: nidrāvaśagatam

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः[^५४१]- "प्रातर् अतिक्रमे दिनं जपोववासौ, रात्रौ तु भोजनम्, पश्चिमातिक्रमे तु रात्रौ जपोपवासौ, प्रातर्भोजनम् इति । दिनशब्दः प्रदर्शनार्थः" । गौतमवचनं चाप्य् उदाहरन्ति- "तिष्ठेद् अहर् अभुञ्जानो ऽभ्यस्तम् इतश् च रात्रिं जपन् सावित्रीम्" (ग्ध् २३.२१) इति । 


[^५४१]:
     M G omit: abhir abhāge . . . kecid āhuḥ

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । उभयत्रापि दिवैव प्रायश्चित्तं युक्तम्, दिनशब्दस्य प्रदर्शनार्थत्वे प्रमाणाभावात् । न ह्य् अस्य तत्सापेक्षस्य स्वार्थप्रतिपादनम् । निरपेक्षं चैतत् । तस्माद् विकल्पो युक्तः । तत्र यस्य सर्वां रात्रिं जाग्रतो न व्याधिः प्रवर्तते स रात्रौ जपिष्यति, अन्यस् तु दिवैव । जपश् च गौतमवचनात् सावित्र्या एव ।

- <u>ननु</u> अत्र कथं गौतमः प्रमाणीक्रियते 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । सापेक्षम् इदं वाक्यं जपेद् इति, जपनीयस्यानिर्देशात् । सत्याम् अपेक्षायां श्रुत्यन्तराद् युक्ता विशेषावगतिः । इह तु कालस्य निर्देशः । नास्ति कालान्तरं प्रत्यपेक्षेति न गौतमो ऽपेक्षते । अथ वा संध्यातिक्रमे प्रायश्चित्ताभिधानात् सावित्रीजपः सिद्ध एव । युक्तं च सावित्र्यास् तु परं नास्तीति । 

- **कामचारतः**[^५४२] । ज्ञात्वैव संध्याकाले यः स्वपिति । **अविज्ञानात्**[^५४३] । चिरसुप्तस्य संध्याकालो ऽयं वर्तत इत्य् अनवबोधो ऽविज्ञानम् । एतद् उक्तं भवति । इच्छया प्रमादकृते चातिक्रमे एतद् एव प्रायश्चित्तम् । यः पुनर् अभ्युदितानस्तमित्संध्याम् अतिक्रामति तस्य प्रायश्चित्तम् अभोजनं नित्यानाम्, कर्मणां समतिक्रम इति । अथ वा यः कामचारेण[^५४४] शास्त्रातिक्रमणं करोति तस्य तद् अविज्ञानम् एव ॥ २.२२० ॥


[^५४४]:
     M G 1st ed.: kāmakāreṇa


[^५४३]:
     M G 1st ed.: ajñānāt


[^५४२]:
     M G 1st ed.: kāmakārataḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In connection with what has gone before one should perform the following
expiatory rite.

If while the student is still sleeping, the sun should rise and thereby
make him incur sin.—‘*Abhi*’ is a preposition according to Pāṇini’s
Sūtra ‘*abhirabhāge*’; and hence we have the accusative ending in
‘*śayanam*.’—The meaning is that if while the student is sleeping, the
sun should rise, then *he should fast during the day*.

Some people oífer the following explanation:—“If the offence is
committed in the morning, the reciting and fasting are to be done during
the day, food being taken at night; while if the offence is committed in
the evening, the reciting and fasting are to be done during the night,
food being taken next morning. So that the term ‘day’ is purely
illustrative.” And in support of their view they quote the words of
Gautama (23.21)—‘He should go without food during the day, and if the
sun sets before him he should fast during the night, reciting the
*Sāvitrī*.’

This however is not right. In both cases the expiatory rite should be
performed during the day; specially as there is no authority for
regarding the term ‘day’ of the text as illustrative; as the term ‘day’
does not have its denotation dependent upon that of the term ‘night’; it
is entirely independent. Hence the right meaning appears to he that
there should be option; that is, if the person is one who will not fall
ill by keeping up the whole night, he might do it during the night;
while others would do it during the day.

That the ‘*reciting*’ is of the *Sāvitrī*, we gather from the words of
Gautama (quoted above).

“How can Gautama be quoted as authority on this point?”

As a matter of fact, the verb ‘*should recite*’ is incomplete, since it
is not mentioned what is to be recited. And when there is such
incompleteness, it is only right that the missing detail should be
filled in from other scriptural sources.

But what the term ‘*day*’ mentions is the *time*; and this does not
stand in need of any other time, so that there is no need for calling in
the help of Gautama.

Or, the right explanation may be that, since the present verse
prescribes the expiatory rite to be performed on the omission of the
twilight prayers, the reciting of the *SācUrī* eorties in naturally; it
has been declared above (2.88) that ‘there is nothing higher than the
*Sāvitrī*.’

‘*Intentionally*;’—*i.e*., who knowingly sleeps in the evening.

‘*Unintentionally*;’—when he has been sleeping for a long time and fails
to perceive the advent of evening; this is what is meant by ‘absence of
intention.’ The sense of all this is as follows:—When the omission is
intentional and due to careless-ṇess, it is necessary to perform the
expiatory rite here prescribed; he who omits the prayers at sun-set and
sun-rise, for him the expiatory rite has been prescribed as ‘fasting,’
which has to be done at the neglect of all compulsory duties.

Or, he who intentionally transgresses the scriptural ordinance, this
also is ‘ignorance’ on his part.—(220)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dinam*’—“The translation of the last words (*Shall fast during the
next day muttering the Sāvitrī*) follows Govindarāja and Kullūka; while
Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda state that the penance shall be
performed *during the (next) day (or night*), and that he who neglects
the evening prayer shall fast in the evening and repeat the Gāyatrī
during the night.”—Buhler.

Medhātithi is not quite accurately represented here. For his view is
clearly put in paras 2 and 3, on page 575 (Translation) where the view,
that “if the offence is committed in the evening the reciting and
fasting are to be done during the night”, has been rejected in
unmistakable terms.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 447), as
laying down an expiation for sleeping at sunrise;—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 398), as laying down the expiation for repeated
delinquency.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 220-220)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (8-53).—\[Reproduces Manu 220.\]

*Gautama* (23.21).—‘The Religious Student before whom the Sun has risen
shall remain without food during the day: and he who remains asleep at
sunset should remain without food during the night, repeating the
Sāvitrī.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.12-13, 14).—‘If asleep, he is forestalled by
sunset, he shall remain without food, and silent, during the night; and
in the morning, shall bathe and then speak;—if he is asleep at sunrise,
he shall remain without food and silent during the day.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.12.22).—‘He who is forestalled by sunrise, he
who is forestalled by sunset, he with bad nails... are impure.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.4.6).—‘Forestalled by sunrise, he shall remain standing
during the day and repeat the Sāvitrī;—similarly if he, while asleep, is
forestalled by sunset, he shall sit up during the night.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘He who is forestalled by sunrise, he who is
forestalled by sunset, who has bad nails, who has black teeth...... are
sinners.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

220	If the sun should rise or set while he is sleeping, be it (that he offended) intentionally or unintentionally, he shall fast during the (next) day, muttering (the Savitri).
</details>
