+++
title = "241 अब्राह्मणाद् अध्यायनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In abnormal times of difficulty learning from a non-Brāhmaṇa has been enjoined, as also the serving of such a teacher, in the shape of following him, during the course of study.—(241)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयं त्व् अत्र[^५७८] विधिः । आपद्[^५७९] ब्राह्मणाध्यापकभावः । आपदः काल **आपत्कालः** । आपद् इत्येव सिद्धे कालग्रहणं वृत्तपूरणार्थम् । पाठान्तरम् आपत्कल्प इति । कल्पनं कल्प आपद्य् एषां कल्पना विधीयते उपदिश्यते । यद् आचार्यः प्रारब्धाध्यपनः प्रायश्चित्तेनान्येन वा निमित्तेन शिष्यं हित्वा देशान्तरं व्रजेत्, न च ब्राह्मणो ऽन्यो ऽध्यापकस् तस्मिन् देशे लभ्यते, बालत्वाद् दूरदेशगमनम् अशक्यम्, तदा ऽब्राह्मणात्[^५८०] क्षत्रियात् तदभावे वैश्याद् अध्ययनम् । प्रकृतत्वात्, "वेदः कृत्स्नः" (म्ध् २.१६५) इति, वेदग्रहणं विधीयते । 


[^५८०]:
     M G 1st ed.: tadā brāhmaṇaḥ


[^५७९]:
     M G 1st ed.: āpanna


[^५७८]:
     M G: ayaṃ tatra

- यद्य् अप्य् अत्राब्राह्मणशब्दो ब्राह्मणजातेर् अन्यत्र जातित्रये वर्तमानं पुरुषत्वम् आचष्टे, तथापि नेह शूद्रस्य ग्रहणम्, तस्याध्यापनाधिकाराभावात् । सत्य् अध्ययने ऽध्यापकत्वम् । अथ "शास्त्रातिक्रमेण शूद्रस्याप्य् अधितवेदत्वस्य संभवः, क्षत्रियवैशययोर् अध्यापकत्वस्येव" । तद् अपि न । यतो धारणे शरीरभेदस् तस्याम्नातः । ततो दण्डमहत्वान् महद् एतद् अकार्यम् अनुमीयते । निन्दितकर्माभ्यासे पतनं तत्संसर्गाच् च ब्रह्मचारिणो ऽत्यन्तदुष्टता स्यात्[^५८१] । "क्षत्रियवैशयोर् अध्यापकत्वनिषेधात् निषेधात् तुल्यदोषः" इति चेद् अस्त्य् अत्र विशेषः । यत्र दण्डप्रायश्चित्ते गुरुणी तत्र महादोषता, स्वपयोस् तु स्वल्पदोषता । न च क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् अध्यापने महती दण्डप्रायश्चित्ते, शूद्रसेव । किं च द्वे निन्दिते कर्मण्य् अध्ययनम् अध्यापनं च, क्षत्रियवैश्ययोस् त्व् एकम् एव । निषिद्धाध्यापनसंसर्गस् त्व् अनेनैवानुज्ञातः, नासौ दोषकरः । निषिद्धाध्ययनेन तु शूद्रेण संसर्गे न किंचित् प्रंआणम् अस्ति । 


[^५८१]:
     M G 1st ed.: na cedaṃ mahatvān mahad etad ācāryakam anumīyate ninditakarmābhyāse patanāt tatsaṃsargāc ca brahmacāriṇām kiṃ tu duṣṭatā syān niṣedhāt tulyadoṣa iti ced asty atra viśeṣaḥ |

- **अनुव्रज्या च शुश्रूषा** । वन्दनपादप्रक्षालनादिशुश्रूषाप्रतिषेधार्थम्[^५८२] अनुव्रज्यैव शुश्रूषा, नान्येति । **यावद् अध्ययनं** यावद् ग्रहणम् ॥ २.२४१ ॥


[^५८२]:
     M G: na vandana-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse contains the injunction.

The ‘*difficulty*’ here meant is *the absence of a teacher*. The
compound ‘*āpatkālaḥ*’ is to be expounded as ‘*āpadaḥ kalaḥ*,’ ‘*time of
difficulty*.’ What is meant to be expressed being obtained from the term
‘*difficulty*’ alone, the additional term ‘*time*’ only serves to fill
up the metre.

‘*Āpatkalpe*’ is another reading. The meaning in this case would be tbat
the ‘*kalpa*,’ ‘*kalpana*,’ *assumption*, of these is permitted during
difficulties.

If the preceptor, after having begun the course of teaching, should
happen, either on account of an expiatory rite or of some other reason,
to abandon the pupil and go to another place,—and no other
Brāhmaṇa-teacher is available,—and the pupil himself being too young, is
unable to go to another place,—then he may receive teaching even from a
non-Brāhmaṇa; *i.e*., from the *Kṣatriya*, and in his absence, from the
Vaiśya. In view of the context, which began with the mention of the
‘learning of the entire Veda’ (165), the ‘*learning*’ here enjoined is
the *getting up of the Veda*.

Though the term ‘*non-Brāhmaṇa*’ denoting all the three castes, except
the Brāhmaṇa, stands for *all men*, yet the *Śūdra* could not be meant
here; for the *Śūdra* is not entitled to learn the Veda; and it is only
when one has *learnt* something that he can *teach* it.

“But by transgressing the scriptural ordinance, the Śūdra also might
learn the Veda, just as the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya do the work of
teaching (which is not permitted).”

This also cannot be; because it has been laid down that if the *Śūdra*
happens to learn the Veda, his body should be cut up. And since the
penalty is so severe, it follows that the act is a grievous sin; and one
who commits a grevious sin is regarded as ‘fallen’; so that if the
Religious Student associated with a ‘fallen’ person, he would render
himself extremely defiled.

“But the act of teaching has been prohibited for the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya also; so that the same guilt would be incurred in their case.”

There is a difference between the two cases. That act is to be regarded
as extremely heinous in connection with which the scriptures prescribe
heavy penalties and expiation; while that in connection with which the
penalty and expiation prescribed are slight, should be regarded as
slight. In connection with the work of teaching done by the *Kṣatriya*
and the *Vaiśya*, the penalty and expiation laid down are not heavy, as
they are in the case of the *Śūdra*. Further, in the case of the
*Śūdra*, there would he two prohibited acts—that of *learning* the Veda,
and that of *teaching* it; while in the case of the *Kṣatriya*, there is
only one,—that of *teaching*. Then, as regards the pupil associating
with one who does the work of teaching in contravention of the law,—such
associating h as been permitted by the present verse itself; hence it
cannot be regarded as leading to defilement; for associating with the
Śūdra, who learns the Veda in contravention to law, on the other hand,
there is no authority at all.

‘*Anuvrajyā* *ca śuśrūṣā*,’ ‘*service the shape of following*’;—this is
meant to prohibit such service as *saluting, washing the feet*, and so
forth.

‘*During the course of study*’;—*i.e*., during the time required for the
getting up of the text.—(241)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 513) in support of
the view that under abnormal circumstances learning may be acquired from
the Kṣatriya and the rest also; where it is explained that the
‘following’ here laid down is to be done only during the time that the
study is being carried on; and the implication of the mention of this
alone is that the other forms of ‘service’ are excluded; (such as
washing of the feet and the,like; this is in agreement with
Medhātithi);—and that ‘learning’ here includes *gems* and other things
also.

The verse is quoted also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 519);—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 52), which explains that the ‘distress,’ ‘*āpat*’
meant here is the absence of a *Brāhmaṇa* teacher, and that in the case
of the non *-Brāhmaṇa* teacher, there is to be mere ‘following,’ no
feet-washing and the like;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 325), which adds
the same notes and explains ‘abrāhmaṇa’ as ‘ Kṣatriya or Vaiśya’;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 143), which says ‘following’ is the only
‘service’ to be rendered, and that also only during the course of study.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 458) in support of
the view that the rules laid down regarding life-long studentship
pertain only to cases where the Teacher is a duly qualified
*Brāhmaṇa*;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 109) to the effect that life-long
studentship is permissible under a *fully efficient Brāhmaṇa
Teacher*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 549), where also it is
pointed out that the rules relating to life-long studentship laid down
below (under verses 247 *et. seq*.) pertain to cases where the teacher
is a fully qualified *Brāhmaṇa*.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 72) in support of the view that
in the event of having a Kṣatriya or some other caste for his ‘teacher,’
the Brāhmaṇa shall not take up life-long residence under him,—nor with a
Brāhmaṇa who is not fit to expound the Veda;—also in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 168).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 241-242)  
**

*Gautama* (7.1.3).—‘In times of distress the Brāhmaṇa may acquire
knowledge from the non-Brāhmaṇa;—there should be following and service
of such Teacher;—but after completion of the study, the Brāhmaṇa is to
be treated as superior.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.2.42-43).—‘One may read under a non-Brāhmaṇa also,
during times of distress;—so long as he is reading under him, he should
follow him, and attend upon him.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.4.25-27).—‘In times of distress, the Brāhmaṇa
may study under the Kṣatriya or the Vaiśya;—these teachers should be
followed;—but after the study, the Brāhmaṇa should have precedence.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, pp. 513-514).—‘Wife, Knowledge,
Dharma, Purity, Literary Sayings, and the various Arts,—these may be
acquired from all.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

241	It is prescribed that in times of distress (a student) may learn (the Veda) from one who is not a Brahmana; and that he shall walk behind and serve (such a) teacher, as long as the instruction lasts.
</details>
