+++
title = "243 यदि त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one likes to live in life-long residence in the teacher’s house, he should, intently serve him till he becomes freed from his body.—(243)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्यन्तं भवम् **आत्यन्तिकं** **वासं गुरोः कुले** नैष्ठिकं ब्रह्मचर्यं **यदि रोचयेत्** तदा **युक्तस्** तत्परः **परिचरेद् एनं** गुरुम्, **आ श्रीरस्य विमोक्षणात्** पाताद् यावच्छरीरं ध्रियत इत्य् अर्थः ॥ २.२४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If he likes to live in absolute—*i.e*., life long, permanent,—residence
in the Teacher’s house,—then, in that owe,—‘*he should
intently*’—diligently—‘*serve him*,’—the Teacher; ‘*till he becomes
freed from his body*,—*i.e*., as long as his body lasts.—(243)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 458), as laying
down the duties of the life-long Student under an efficient
Brāhmaṇa-teacher;—to the same effect in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 504);—also
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 551), where the term ‘*asmai*’ is
explained as standing for such a student as is not lame or dwarf, or
blind, or otherwise incapacitated; and it is added that the provision of
tins ‘life-long studentship’ need not be incompatible with the texts
laying down a *life-long* performance of the *Agnihotra* for the
Brāhmaṇa (which involves the necessity of taking a wife); because the
latter is meant for only those students who intend to enter the
‘Household,’ and are on that account called ‘*Upakurvāṇa*,’ as
distinguished from the ‘*Naiṣṭhika*’ who remains a ‘student’ all his
life and never enters the household.

This is also quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 72) as indicating the optional
character of *life-long* studentship;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
171) as discounting the view that “*life-long* studentship is meant only
for the maimed and other incapable persons;”—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 62), to the same effect.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 243-244)  
**

*Gautama* (3.5).—‘Dependence upon the Teacher, till the end.’

*Gautama* (3.9).—‘Behaving thus, he attains the Brahmic Region.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6.).—‘The Religious Student should attend on the teacher
till death.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.21.6).—‘The Religious Student shall surrender
his body to the Teacher’s House, observing the same restrictions as
those during the course of his study.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (7.3, 1).—‘The Religious Student shall serve the
Teacher,—till the falling off of the body.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.43).—‘Or he may pass the whole of his life in the Teacher’s
house.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.49, 50).—‘The Life-long Student shall remain with the
Teacher;—and after the Teacher, with the teacher’s son, or his wife or
his fire.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 549).—‘The observances of the
Life-long Student are as follows:—the Twilight Prayers, Fire-tending,
Vedic Study, Alms-begging, Sleeping on the ground,
Self-control,—observing these till death, the Life-long Student attains
the Brahmic region.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 549, and Parāśaramādhava, p.
458).—‘He shall maintain his studentship till his body dies; on his
teacher’s death, serving the fire. With speech controlled, eating of
alms during the fourth, sixth and eighth parts of the day, dependent on
the teacher, with hair-braided or with top-hair braided, walking behind
the teacher when he works, standing when he is seated, reading when
called upon to do so, offering to the teacher all that he obtains as
alms,—he shall eat with his permission;—and avoiding sleeping on the
cot, washing of the teeth, and annotating of the body, he shall remain
standing or seated, and bathing three times during the day.’

*Devala* (Do., p. 550).—‘Wearing of the sacred thread, the string of
beads, the staff, the loin-cloth, the water-pot and the girdle; eating
once only; bathing more than once; performing Agnihotra both times, as
also the twilight prayers;—with hair and nails uncut; he shall avoid
garland, perfumes, unguents, ornaments, dresses, shoes, conveyances,
jumping, bathing, running, teaching, medication, astrology, science of
house-building, auspicious rites, fattening rites, allaying of portents,
music, assemblies, entrance into contracts, caligraphy, carpentry,
measurements of houses, fields, substances, and grains, use of weapons,
gambling...’

*Hārīta*, (Do.).—‘Having fetched sacrificial fuel, he shall attend upon
the Fire by sweeping, scratching, rekindling, collecting, putting on
fuel, worshipping, hymning and saluting; he shall not touch it with his
feet; nor shall he blow it with the mouth; shall not carry fire and
water at the same time: shall not eat when there is indigestion, etc..
Those Brāhmaṇas who keep up this studentship become immortal.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘Till the falling off of the body, those who serve the
teacher, ever strict in celibacy, reach the region of Brahman and are
not born again.’

*Chāndogya Upaniṣad* (Do., p. 551).—‘He who is firm in Brahman attains
immortality.’

*Dakṣa* (Do., p. 552).—‘The second kind of Religious Student is the
life-long one.’

*Viṣṇu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 459).—‘The life-long studentship is for the
dwarf, the humpbacked, one born blind, the sexless, the lame, the
diseased and the invalid.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

243	But if (a student) desires to pass his whole life in the teacher's house, he must diligently serve him, until he is freed from this body.
</details>
