+++
title = "245 न पूर्वम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At first the pupil, knowing his duties, should not give anything to his teacher; but when going to take the final bath, he should, on being ordered by the teacher, present something for him, to the best of his capacity;—(245)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नैष्ठिकस्यायं गुरवे ऽर्थदानं[^५८८] प्रतिषिध्यते, स्नास्यतो गुर्वर्थविधानात् । न च नैष्ठिकस्य स्नानम् अस्ति । प्रकृतश् च नैष्ठिक एव । उपकुर्वाणस्य तु उपनयनात् प्रभृति यावत् स्नानम् अस्त्य् एव सति संभवे यथाशक्त्या दानम् । 


[^५८८]:
     M G: 'rghadānaṃ

- **पूर्वं** स्नानाद् गुरवे **किंचिद् उपकुर्वीत** दद्यात्, ददात्यर्थे धातुः सोपसर्गो ऽतश् च स्वसाध्या चतुर्थी । अथ वा क्रियाग्रहणम् अपि कर्तव्यम् इति, ततः संप्रदानत्वम् । **धर्मवित्**पदम् अनुवादः । **स्नास्यंस् तु** स्नानकाले प्राप्ते **गुरुणा** आदीष्टम् "अमुम् अर्थम् आहर" इति । ततः **शक्त्या** यावन्तं शक्नोति तावन्तम् । **गुर्वर्थम्** । गुरोर् इदं गुर्वर्थम् । गुरोर् येन प्रयोजनं तम् **आहरेद्** उपनयेत् ।

- <u>ननु</u> अयं नैष्ठिकस्य गुर्वर्थकरणप्रतिषेधः । 

- <u>न ह्य् एते</u> द्वे वाक्ये, एकेन प्रतिषेधः, अपरेण गुर्वर्थविधिः । स्नाने गुर्वर्थो ऽवश्यं कर्तव्यम् इत्य् अयं विधिः । प्रतिषेधस् तच्छेषः । उपकारप्रतिषेधे[^५८९] च सर्वशुश्रूषाविधिर् अनर्थकः स्यात् । न च दानम् एवोपकारः, येन धनोपकार एव निषिध्येत, नान्यः प्रियहितादिः । अर्थवादत्वे त्व् अयथार्थता न दोषः । गम्यते चात्रैकवाक्यता ॥ २.२४५ ॥


[^५८९]:
     M G 1st ed.: pratiṣedha upakārapratiṣedhe
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse should be taken as prohibiting the making of presents to the
Teacher by the Life-long Student; since it lays down the gift to the
Teacher as to be presented only by the pupil who is going to take the
Final Bath, which the Life-long Student never takes; and it is the
Life-long Student that forms the subject of the context. As for the (the
other kind of student, who is only in temporary residence), he does go
on making presents to the Teacher, on every possible occasion, since the
very day of the Initiatory Rite.

‘*At first*’;—*i.e*., before the final Bath.

‘*Should not give anything to his Teacher*’;—the verb ‘*upakurvīta*’
stands here for *giving*, such being the force of the prefix; so that
the Dative in *gurave* is due to this verb itself. Or, the Teacher may
be regarded as the person aimed at by the *act* (denoted by
*upakurvīta*); and in this case the Dative would be in accordance with
the *Vārtika* on Pāṇini 2.3.13.

‘*But when going to take the Final Bath*’;—*i.e*., when the time for the
Final Bath has arrived;—‘*being ordered by the teacher*,’—in such words
as ‘bring me such and such a thing,’—he should ‘*to the best of his
capacity*’—as much as he may be able to bring,—‘*present somethin*,’
useful, ‘*to the teacher*.’

“But this verse contains (as you have asserted at the outset) the
prohibition of the Life-long Student presenting anything to the Teacher
\[and how do you reconcile this with the latter half, which prescribes
such *giving*?\].”

True; but the verse does not contain two independent sentences,—one (the
first half of the verse) prohibiting the gift, and the other (the second
half) permitting it. The fact is that there is a clear injunction that
at the Final Bath a gift should be made to the Teacher; and it is to
this injunction that the preceding prohibition is subservient; for, If
the present prohibition related to all kinds of beneñt to the Teacher,
the entire body of injunctions laying down the service of the Teacher
would become nullified; further, ‘*gift*’ is not the only *benefit* that
can be conferred; so that there is no justification for restricting the
prohibition of ‘benefit’ to the *gift of money* only, and not to the
‘doing of what is agreeable and beneficial to him.’ There is nothing
incongruous in taking the passage in a sense which is not the literal
meaning,—when the passage is a purely commendatory one; and it is quite
clear that the two halves of the verse form one syntactical whole
\[hence the former is taken as subservient and supplementary to the
latter\].—(245)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 567) in support of
the view that no ‘fee’ is to paid to the Teacher before the *completion*
of study; and it adds that this ‘Concluding Bath’ is for the purpose of
entering the married state,—and not for that of any other
life-stage;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 179), which adds that
this refers to the presenting of a *living*, there being no prohibition
regarding other kinds of presents.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (2. 55, 56).—‘At the end of the study, he should approach the
teacher with a present;—having done this, when permitted by him, he
should take the Final Bath.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1. 7. 19).—‘Having finished his study, he shall
present in the proper manner to the teacher as fee whatever may be in
his power.’

*Viṣṇu* (28. 42).—‘After having acquired the Veda, he shall, when
permitted by him, present to him something good and then take the Bath.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2. 1).—‘Having presented a good thing to the teacher, he
shall take the Bath, with his permission; after having completed either
the Veda or the observances, or both.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 4. 1,2).—‘The Religious Student, after having
studied the Veda, shall make a present to the Teacher.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p 573).—‘Having studied the four,
or three or two Vedas, or a single Veda, the wise man should satisfy the
teacher with fees, having obtained from his parents and relations the
wealth necessary for it.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 575).—‘At the end of study, he
should approach the teacher with a present and then perform the Bath.’

*Śaunaka* (Do.).—‘Having read the four Vedas and kept the observances,
the pupil shall give to the teacher the fee that he can, and then,
permitted by him, he shall perform the Samāvartana Rites.’

*Laghu Hārīta* (Do., p. 574).—‘That teacher who teaches a man a single
syllable,—there is nothing on earth by giving which he would be free
from the debt to him.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

245	He who knows the sacred law must not present any gift to his teacher before (the Samavartana); but when, with the permission of his teacher, he is about to take the (final) bath, let him procure (a present) for the venerable man according to his ability,
</details>
