+++
title = "02 राजविद्या राजगुह्यम्"

+++
9.2 This is a 'royal science', the king among sciences; 'the royal
mystery', the king among mysteries. Or royal science may also mean the
science known and practised by kings. Indeed kings are those who have
broad and profound minds. The meaning is that this is the science of
great minds. This is a mystery, because the great-minded alone are
skilled in keeping mysteries. This is 'supreme purifier'; for it removes
completely all blemishes opposed to the attainment of Myself. It is
realised by 'direct perception'. Avagama' is that which is apprehended -
the subject of knowledge. It is that knowledge which has become direct
perception, so that its object is directly apprehended. The import is
that I, when worshipped in the spirit of Bhakti, become perceptible to
the worshipper immediately. Even so, it is in 'accord with Dharma' or
inseparable from Dharma. What is called Dharma is that which constitutes
the means for the highest good. Though it is of the nature of supreme
good, as it brings about the vision of Myself, yet it is also the means
for completely attaining Me, which is the end unsurpassed and the final
good. Because of this, it is 'pleasurable' to practise; its adoption is
a matter of supreme love. It is 'abiding', imperishable. It does not
perish even after leading to My attainment. That is, I give Myself up to
one who performs this form of worship; even then it appears to Me that I
have done nothing for him. Such is the meaning.
