+++
title = "23 येऽप्यन्यदेवता भक्ता"

+++
9.23 Those, however, who are devoted to Indra and other divinities, who
rely on the three Vedas alone, and who, possessed of faith, worship
Indra and other divinities - they too worship Me actually in the light
of the truth that all existing things constitute My body and have Me for
their selves. In the light of this principle, terms like Indra denote Me
only. The worshippers of Indra and other deities therefore worship Me
only, in ways not sanctioned by the Sastras. They do not worship Indra
and other divinities with a proper understanding of the place of these
deities in the light of the Vedanta texts. An example is 'Wherein (i.e.,
in the Supreme Self) the sacrifices known as the Caturhotri attain their
fulfilment through the divinities' (Tai. Ar., 4) etc. These texts say in
what way these forms of worship apply to these divinties. For all
Vedanta texts lay down that the Supreme Person alone is to be worshipped
directly when they enjoin the worship of Indra and other divinities, as
they form the body of the Supreme Person. The meaning is that in the
Caturhotri sacrifice like Agnihotra, the full moon and the new moon
sacrifices etc., it is the Supreme Self only that is worshipped, as He
abides as the self in Indra etc., who are the ostensible objects
worshipped in these sacrifices by which these worshippers obtain their
fulfilment through them. Therefore, the votaries of the three Vedas do
not understand that these rituals form the worship of the Supreme Person
and that He alone is to be worshipped. As they do not do so, they become
experiencers of limited results, and they are again liable to fall into
Samsara. Sri Krsna gives expressions to this:
