+++
title = "26 पत्रम् पुष्पम्"

+++
9.26 Whoever offers to Me with true devotion a leaf, or a flower, or a
fruit or water, which can be easily obtained, I accept it. That true
devotion is love of such an exalted kind that the devotee cannot sustain
himself without making such offering; the devotee has no extraneous
purpose other than serving Me. Such an offering coming from a heart
rendered pure with that singleness of purpose of considering the
offering as an end in itself - I, the Lord of the universe, whose sport
consists in the origin, maintenance and dissolution of the entire world,
who has all desires fulfilled, whose will is always accomplished, whose
auspicious attributes are unlimited and unsurpassed, who is enjoying the
infinite and unsurpassed bliss that is in Myself - I accept and enjoy
the aforesaid type of offering, as if I was obtaining a desired object
far beyond the range of My hopes. Thus it is declared in the
Moksa-dharma: "Whatever acts are consecrated by those whose intellects
are concentrated in single-pointed devotion, all these, the Lord Himself
accepts on His head." (Ma. Bha. Sa., 340.64) Sri Krsna proceeds to say:
As there is this distinctive excellence, incomprehensible by speech and
mind in respect of these great men called the Jnanins, you also,
following them, become a Jnanin, i.e., have your self and all your
belongings 'bent down,' i.e., dedicated, under the weight of Bhakti as
prescribed earlier. Be always singing My praises, doing My services,
worshipping Me and prostrating before Me; also perform your secular and
Vedic duties, periodical and occasional, in this manner.'
