+++
title = "30 अपि चेत्सुदुराचारो"

+++
9.30 Even though he has transgressed rules that ought to be followed and
has failed to avoid what a person belonging to a particular class should
avoid, if he has begun to worship Me in the manner described above with
undivided devotion, namely, with worship as the only purpose - such a
person must be considered highly righteous. He is eminent among the
worshippers of Visnu. He must be esteemed as fit for honour. The meaning
is that he is eal to those Jnanins mentioned earlier. What can be the
reason for this; The reason is that, he has rightly resolved, i.e., his
resolve is in the proper direction. 'The Lord who forms the sole cause
of the entire universe, who is the Supreme Brahman, Narayana, the Lord
of all mobile and immobile beings, is our Master, our Teacher, and our
Friend, highest object of enjoyment,' - such a resolve is difficult to
be made by all. Its effect, unremitting worship which has no other
purpose, will be found in him who makes such a resolve. Hence he is holy
and is to be highly honoured. When this resolve, and unremitting worship
which is its effect, are found in a person, he is not to be belittled;
for, his transgression of rules is a negligible mistake compared to this
kind of excellence. On the other hand he is to be regarded with high
honour. Such is the meaning. No, if it be said that transgression of
rules will annul the flow of worship, as declared in the Sruti passages
like, 'One who has not ceased from bad conduct, is not tranil, is not
composed and also not calm in mind, cannot obtain Him through
intelligence' (Ka. U., 1.2.24), Sri Krsna replies:
