+++
title = "34 मन्मना भव"

+++
9.34 Focus your mind on Me; fix your mind on Me uninterruptedly like a
continous stream of oil - on Me the Ruler of rulers, antagonistic to all
that is evil, the sole abode of auspiciousness, omniscient, whose
resolve is always true, the sole cause of the entire universe, the
Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Person; on Me, of long large eyes like a
lotus petal; who has the complexion of a clear blue cloud; whose shining
lustre is like that of a thousand suns simultaneously risen; on Me, the
great ocean of the nectar of beauty; of four arms, noble and strong, and
of brilliant yellow raiment; on Me, adorned with a pure crown,
fish-shaped ear-rings, garlands, bracelet on the arms and bangles at the
wrist; on Me, the ocean of infinite mercy, affability, beauty,
sweetness, majesty, magnanimity and parental affection; on Me, the
refuge of all without exception and without regard to their differences;
on Me the Lord of all. Sri Krsna again makes the same clear. Be My
devotee. Be one whose mind is focussed on Me by contemplating on Me as
exceedingly dear. Such is the meaning. He makes thie yet clearer. Be My
worshipper, namely, become engaged in My worship, which you have begun
to practise by your experience of Me as supremely dear and unlimited and
unsurpassed. What is called worship is the conduct of one who realises
that he is absolutely a subsidiary - (Sesa) of God. Worship consists
also in offering all things of enjoyment such as waving of lights etc.,
all those things which come into bodily contact like garlands, sandal
paste etc., and those meant for offering like food preparations and
other edibles. The meaning is this: Let your mind be focussed on Me so
as to be engaged in My worship, resulting from love which is unlimited
and unsurpassed and which is born from the experience of Myself. Again
Sri Krsna expounds the same: Bow down to Me. Do not be satisfied only
with services of one who is absolutely subsidiary to me. Do services
which are incomparably dear and animated by an experience of Myself who
is dear and unlimited and unsurpassed. Also bow down to Me in utter
humility, regarding Me as the supreme goal, i.e., He who is the supreme
abode and the supreme goal. The meaning is that having resorted to Me,
it is impossible for you to live without Me. Having disciplined the mind
in this way and considering Me as the supreme goal, you will thus,
through love which is unsurpassed and incomparable, obtain a mind which
is fit for experiencing Me. You will then reach Me alone. Here the term
Atman stands for the mind. The import is that, holding Me as the sole
support, possesing a mind of this kind, meditating on Me, experiencing
Me, worshipping Me and bowing down to Me - you will reach Me alone.
Thus, with such a turn of mind you carry on, for pleasing Me alone, your
secular works for bodily sustenance and Vedic activities like obligatory
and occasional rites, regarding them as actuated by Me and finding sole
joy in absolute subservience to Me. You shall ever engage yourself in
praising My names with love and in endeavouring to serve Me and bowing
down to Me etc. You shall contemplate on the entire universe as being
under My rule and being subsidiary (Sesa) to Me. Contemplating on the
multitudes of My attributes, which are exceedingly dear to you, and
practising every day this worship as described, you will reach Me alone.
