+++
title = "24 ब्रह्मार्पणम्"

+++
4.24 Brahmarpanam etc. That is to be offered to the Brahman (list) :
that, the offering of which is in the Brahman i.e., the reentrance of
which is only into That, just from which it has originated. The Brahman
(2nd) : That which is the same as the entire universe what we see - this
is that very oblation. Into the Brahman-fire : into the fire which is
the same as the Brahman, the highly tranil Supreme Consciousness. By the
Brahman : by one or the other action. Is poured : is offered for the
augmentation of It's lumination. Hence, a man of Yoga, whose
Brahman-action of this sort is itself a deep concentration - by him, the
Brahman alone is \[a goal\] to be attained i.e., to be realised, not
anything else; for there is no other thing. Alternatively \[in the
verse\] the meaning 'by him' brings in, by implication, the meaning 'by
whom'. So the following is the alignment \[of words\] : The action, in
which the Brahman-oblation, intended to be an offering to a deity of the
Brahman-nature, has been indeed poured into the Brahman-fire by the
sacrificer, identical with the Brahman - that very Brahman-action of
this sort is itself a deep contemplaiton, because it is the means to
gain the innate nature of the Self. And what is attained by this
Brahman-action-contemplation is the very Brahman Itself and not any
other fruit. Indeed it has been maintained \[by the Lord\] as : 'The way
in which men resort to Me, \[in the same way I favour them\]'. (IV, II)
'Those, who have cultivated the nature of performing sacrifice which is
nothing but Me, but of the delimited nature - they attain, therefore,
the fruit of similar \[limited\] nature. This is different matter. But,
with regard to those who have realised the nature of the sacrifice
identical with Me ( the Supreme Consciousness), the Unlimited and
complete; how could they be entertaining a craving for a bit of limited
fruit ;' This is the idea here. Thus, a top secret is furnished by this
and by the succeeding verses. that has been also detailed by us (Ag.) -
even though our intelligence is limited - as far as our intelligence
permits, by not transgressing the instructions of our preceptors. Maybe,
for a person without a regular course of the oral tradition \[of the
system\], this looks like a picture painted on the sky and does not
appeal to his mind. On that account we should not be blamed. It has been
declared by some, in this context, that \[here in this verse\] the
oblation, the fire and the instruments like sruk \[used for offering the
oblation into the fire in the sacrifice\] and also the act \[of
offering\] are all adjectives alifying the Brahmam. This \[explanation\]
deserves to be ignored. For, these commentators have not troden on the
path of the secret tradition.
