+++
title = "25 दैवमेवापरे यज्ञम्"

+++
4.25 Daivam etc. the Devas are the sense-organs that are playful. The
yajna that stands based on them is nothing but the act of receiving
objects of their own. Certain persons are thoroughly devoted only to
that yajna, i.e., they gain the gain of their own Self by examining this
(yajna) from its root . That is why they are men of Yoga; for, they are
absorbed in the Yoga permanently at all stages. Indeed in Yogin the
suffix ini, a synonym of matup, here signifies 'perpetual connection'.
Further, they (Yogins) pour, as an offering, the self-same yajna, above
defined, into the Brhaman-fire that is insatiable i.e. that cannot be
satisfied. Thus \[the verse\] has been interpreted by some. However, the
Sage (the author of the Gita) does not violate the context. Hence, that
meaning which exists in his heart we shall show : Certain masters of
Yoga perform godly sacrifice i.e., sacrifice, consisting of external
objects, and intending only deities like Indra etc., of varied forms.
Further, with a single conviction that 'It is a Yajna and a thing to be
performed', i.e., with no craving for fruit, they offer the same
sacrifice, that is being performed, into the Brahman - fire which is
insatiable i.e., difficult to satisfy. Thus even those, who perform
sacrificial rites with material objects, attain the Supreme Brahman.
For, it is going to be declared in the seel : 'All these persons too
have understood sacrifice' (IV, 30 below). The Vedic text also \[says\]
: 'The gods offered sacrifice \[just\] as sacrifice'. (RV, I, 164, 50;
TS, III, v, II, 5; etc.)
