+++
title = "30 अपरे नियताहाराः"

+++
4.29-30 Apane etc. Apare etc. Prana (1st) : the arising one i.e., the
nada which has, as its end, that one where the first syllabic instance
of Pranava dissolves. Into the apana : into what sets down, and is of
the nature of entering inot the Svananda. They offer : Thus is the
svadhyaya of the nature of the firmness of the body is described. What
sets down, some \[sages\] established on what rises up, so that the
pupil's self (mind) may learn the processes of sending out and drawing
in \[the vital airs\]. By \[thus\] uniting these two, they bestow
emanciaption on their own Self and on the Self of the pupils; and they,
on that account, remain with their mind firmly established on the
svadhyaya-sacrifice full of Svananda (i.e., Nijananda) and Parananda - a
svadhyaya of the nature of examining, enlightening, entering and uniting
\[the prana nad apana\] in their own Self and in the Self of the pupils.
That is why the process of filling \[the vital air\] in has been first
mentioned; and the process of emptying the same out at the last.
Further, the process of the inward turning of the act of enjoying
objects, is suggested by the first arter of the verse (29), and by the
second arter the act of coming out for enjoying the objects through the
process of having the supreme state-of-bodylessness. Therefore, the
performers of the sacrifice of wisdom are not different from the
performers of the svadhyaya-sacrifice. The same sages have the desries
of their own and of their pupils fulfilled on account of their thorough
practice of the said activity; control both the said paths, restrict
their food viz., enjoyment of objects; and offer pranas into the pranas,
i.e, they offer, by means of the ietude at the stage of stopping \[the
vital air\], the rising of all the mental modifications into the
splendour of rising waves of Parananda and Nirananda. All these persons
know the truth (or nature) of hte sacrifices, starting from the
material-sacrifice upto the wisdom-sacrifice; only by that means they
have eradicated their sins; that is to say, they have uprooted the
mighty delusion with its roots, made of mental impressions of duality.
