+++
title = "35 यज्ज्ञात्वा न"

+++
4.34-35 Tat etc. Yaj=jnatva etc. This : the knowledge. By prostration :
by devotion. By iniry : by the consideration of pros and cons, by good
reasoning etc. By service : by practice. You should learn \[this\], For,
those that are endowed with knowledge i.e., your own different
sense-organs, that are exceedingly favoured by consciousness, will point
out nearby i.e., will lead the truth to you if you remain practising in
the said manner. For this, it has been said that they (sense-organs) are
capable of showing the truth i.e., they show nothing but the truth. That
has been said : 'The Yoga alone is the teacher of Yoga \[practice\]' and
'On \[reaching\] that \[seeded Yoga\] \[there arises\] an insight,
truth-bearing' (YS, I, 48). If 'those that are endowed with knowledge'
is interpreted to mean 'other wise persons', then it would amount to say
that what the Bhagavat Himself had taught is untruth. Or, the purpose of
saying in this manner may be to teach a conventional rule : Other
persons too should learn from the men of wisdom only by prostration
etc., and not by any other means. The \[locatives\] atmani 'in your
Self' and mayi 'in Me' are in the same-case-relationship, and they mean
'in your Soul that has attained (realised Its) identity with Me'. Atho
is an expletive. In order to established the \[total\] sameness
(identity) of the Absolute with the \[individual\] Self, a certain
characteristic mark \[of the two\], is mentioned \[here\]. If the
non-sameness (non-identity) \[of these two\] is intended, then the
meanings 'choice' etc., \[of atho\] have no relevance here. Saying that
'the sin also perishes' in the first verse \[of following two\], in
order to clarify the earlier statement 'all actions, leaving no bit,
\[meet their end in knowledge' - verse 33 above\]; indicating, by 'all
actions' - in the second verse-that the suggested meaning of 'leaving no
bit (verse 33)' is 'not even a bit of mental impression \[of actions\]
survives'; \[the Lord\] explains-
