+++
title = "05 दैवी सम्पद्विमोक्षाय"

+++
16.1-5 It has been stated \[at the end of the last chapter\] that 'by
understanding this' etc. The thing called 'understanding' comes to be
\[in the following\] manner : After the knowledge, born from hearing
\[the scriptures etc.\], there arises a thought-process consisting of
the logical analysis, deliberation and deep meditation that take the
form 'This (what is taught in the scriptures etc.) is like this'. The
above thought-process is of the nature of investigation, critical
examination and judgement. From this thought-process one gains a good
knowledge of a well practised from i.e., a contemplation of that object,
free from the humiliation (influence) of different category. When this
is gained, understanding is achieved Hence, it will be declared : 'By
critically examining in this way fully, act as you please'. (Ch. XVIII,
63). Here, only the preceptor and the scripture are mainly capable of
creating the scriptural knowledge. But in producing reasoning,
deliberation and meditation the main cause is the capacity to examine
critically a thing and it is a special attribute of the pupil and it is
an important one. Therefore, with an idea that this is in Arjuna and
with an intention to add a preparatory note to the purposeful statement
'By critically examining this, \[act as you please\]'; the Bhagavat, the
preceptor, says 'Fearlessness etc.' The Ignorance, born of the Tamas
(Stand) occupies the devilish side. This is repelled (or removed) by the
well augmented wisdom that takes hold of the divine part. This is the
nature of things \[under estion\] 'You (Arjuna) have taken refuge in the
divine part viz., wisdom, born of the Sattva (Strand). Therefore
shirking off the internal Ignorance in the nature of delusion, you
should undertake the action, that has the sanction of the scriptures and
that is of the nature of eradicating the external foe having the form of
ignorance.' Thus commences the \[present\] chapter. Hence - Abhayam
etc., upto pandava. These are the identification marks of a person of
divine parts. \[Hence\] they are clearly identified. Self-restraint :
subduing the sense organs. Thought-lessness : the perfarmance of action
without examining the antecedent and the seel; its absence is the
absence of thought-lessness. Vital power : the act of casting away
\[all\] limitations by taking hold energy in the Self. \[All\] this is
the divine wealth and this is for your total emancipation, as it
destroys craving. Therefore, don't get sorrow like 'Having killed
brothers etc., how can I (Arjuna) enjoy pleasure ;' \[The idea of\] the
rest \[of passage\] is clear.
