+++
title = "05 अहिंसा समता"

+++
10.5 Buddhih, intelligence-the power of the internal organ to know of
things which are subtle etc. Indeed, people talk of a man possessed of
this (power) as intelligent. Jnanam, wisdom-knowledge of entities such
as the Self etc. Asammohah, non-delusion-proceeding with discrimination
with regard to things that are to be known as they present them-selves.
Ksama, forgiveness-unperturbability of the mind of one who is abused or
assulted. Satyam, truth-an utterance regarding what one has seen, heard,
and felt oneself, communicated as such to others for their
understanding, is said to be truth. Damah, control of the external
organs. Samah, control of the internal organs. Sukham, happiness.
Duhkham, sorrow. Bhavah, birth; and its opposite abhavah, death. And
bhayam, fear; as also its opposite abhayam, fearlessness. Ahimsa,
non-injury-non-cruely towards creatures. Samata, eanimity. Tustih,
satisfaction-the idea of sufficiency with regard to things acired.
Tapah, austerity-disciplining the body through control of the organs.
Danam, charity-distribution (of wealth) according to one's capacity.
Yasah, fame-renown arising from righteousness. On the contrary, ayasah
is infamy due to unrighteousness. (These) prthak-vidhah, different;
bhavah, dispositions-intelligence etc. as described; bhuanam, of beings,
of living bengs. bhavanti, spring; mattah, eva, from Me alone, \[This is
said in the sesne that none of these dispositions can exist without the
Self.\] from God, in accordanced with their actions. Moreover,
