+++
title = "32 सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च"

+++
10.32 O Arjuna sarganam, of creations; I am the adih, beginning; ca, and
; he antah, end; ca eva, as also; the madhyam, middle-I am the origin,
continuance and dissolution. At the commencement (verse 20) origin, end,
etc. only of things possessed of souls were spoken of, but here the
mention is of all creations in general. This is the difference.
Vidyanam, among knowledges; I am the adhyatma-vidya, knowledge of the
Self, it being the foremost because of its leading to liberation.
Pravadatam, of those who date; aham, I; am vadah, Vada, which is
preeminent since it is a means to determining true purport. Hence I am
that . By the word pravadatam are here meant the different kinds of date
held by dators, viz Vada, Jalpa, and Vitanda. \[Vada: discussion with
open-mindedness, with a veiw to determining true purport; jalpa:
pointless date; Vitanda: wrangling discussion. \[Jalpa is that mode of
date by which both parties establish their own viewpoint through direct
and indirect proofs, and refute the view of the opponent through
circumvention (Chala) and false generalization (Jati) and by pointing
out unfitness (of the opponent) tobe argued with (Nigraha-sthana). But
where one party establishes his viewpoint, and the other refutes it
through circumvention, false generalization and showing the unfitness of
the opponent to be argued with, without establishing his own views, that
is termed Vitanda. Jalpa and Vitanda result only in a trial of streangth
between the opponents, who are both desirous of victory, But the result
of Vada is the ascertainment of truth between the teacher and the
disciple or between others, both unbiased.-Gloss of Sridhara Swami on
this verse.\]-Tr.\]
