+++
title = "24 समदुःखसुखः स्वस्थः"

+++
14.24 - 14.25 He who is 'alike in pleasure and pain,' namely, whose mind
is eal in pleasure and pain; 'who dwells in his self,' namely, who
dwells in his self because his love for the self keeps his mind in
eanimity in pleasure and pain arising from the birth, death etc., of his
sons and other relatives and friends, and who, because of this, 'looks
upon a clod, a stone and a piece of gold as of eal value,' who
conseently remains the same towards things dear or hateful, i.e., who
treats alike the worldly objects desired and undesired; who is
'intelligent,' namely, proficient in discrimination between the Prakrti
and the self; who, therefore, regards blame and praise as alike, namely,
who treats with eality praise and blame looking upon good and evil
alities as born of identification with bodies such as those of men etc.,
and as such unconnected with his real self; who is the 'same in honour
and dishonour' because these are feelings based on the misconception
that the body is the self, and as a conseence of such discrimination
between the body and the self, 'looks alike on friend and foe,' because
he understands that ther is no connection between them and himself; and
who has thus abandoned all entrprises in which embodied beings are
involved - he who is like this, is said to have risen above the Gunas.
Now Sri Krsna states the main method (technie) for transcending such
Gunas:
