+++
title = "27 ब्रह्मणो हि"

+++
14.27 The term 'hi' (for) denotes cause. I, who am to be served by
unswerving Bhakti Yoga, am 'the ground of the individual self, immortal
and immutable, and also of eternal Dharma,' namely, surpassing eternal
prosperity and also perfect felicity, i.e., of the felicity attained by
the Jnanin stated in texts such as 'Realising that Vasudeva is all'
(7.19). I, being of such nature, devotion to Me helps the Jiva to
transcend the Gunas. Although the expression 'eternal Dharma' is
indicative of the conduct to be observed, in the given context, it means
the goal to be attained; for, what follows and what precedes it, denote
the goal and not conduct. The purport is this: It has been stated that
seeking refuge with the Lord is the only means for transcending the
Gunas and the attainment of self-realisation, prosperity and the Supreme
Being in the earlier text beginning with, 'For this divine Maya of Mine
consisting of the three Gunas is hard to break through, except for those
who take refuge in Me alone ৷৷.' (7.14). Thus, seeking surrender to the
Lord with one-pointed mind is the only means for transcending the Gunas
and for the attainment of the state of brahman through that. \[Here
Prapatti, surrender to the Lord, is mentioned as a limb of unswerving
Bhakti Yoga according to some interpreters. This is however a disputable
point, as some maintain that Prapatti is in itself an independent
path\].
