+++
title = "07 मत्तः परतरम्"

+++
7.7 I am absolutely superior to all in two ways: 1) I am the cause of
both the Prakrtis and I am also their controlling master (Sesin). This
controllership over inanimate nature is exercised through the animate
Prakrti (the Jivas) who form the inner controller (Sesin) of their
bodies which are constituted of inanimate nature. 2) I am supreme to all
in another sense also - as the possessor of knowledge, power, strength
etc., in an infinite degree. There is no entity other than Me with such
attributes of an eal or superior nature. The aggregate of all the
animate and inanimate things, whether in their causal state or in the
state of effect, is strung on Me who abides as their Self, as a row of
gems on a thread. They depend on Me. And it is proved that the universe
of inanimate and animate beings exists as the body with Brahman (i.e.
the Supreme Person) as their Self as declared by the Antaryami-brahmana
and other texts: 'He whose body is the earth' (Br. U., 3.7-3), 'He whose
body is the self' (Br. U. Madh., 3.7.22), and 'He is the inner self of
all beings, without evil, He is the Lord in the supreme heaven, He is
the one Narayana' (Su. U., 7). Thus, as everything constitutes the body
of the Supreme Person forming only a mode of His who is their Self, the
Supreme Person alone exists, and all things (which we speak of as
diversity) are only His modes. Therefore all terms used in common
parlance for different things, denote Him only. Sri Krsna shows this by
coordinating some important ones among these entities with Himself.
