+++
title = "13 त्रिभिर्गुणमयैर्भावैरेभिः"

+++
7.13 Now, in this way, the whole universe, consisting of animate and
inanimate entities belonging to Me, evolves from time to time from Me
only, is absorbed in Me, and abides in Me alone. It constitutes My body
and has Me for its self. Whether in the causal state or in the state of
effect, it is I who have all these entities as My modes, because all
entities form My body. Thus, in regard to all these modes, I am superior
to them, as I am their cause, principal, and as I possess a complex of
countless auspicious attributes like knowledge, strength etc. In every
way I remain as the highest being. There exists none higher than Myself.
Such being the case, I am superior to these entities composed of the
alities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas - superior to them by My
extraordinary attributes and by having these various modes for My
enjoyment. I am the highest and immutable, i.e., I form a unity in
Myself. This world constituted of gods, men, animals and immovables, and
deluded by the three Gunas of Prakrti and its evolutes are inferior and
transient. The forms of bodies, senses and objects of enjoyment
comprising the world are there in accordance with their past Karmas. No
one in the world knows Me. How is it possible that all experiencing
beings think as enjoyable objects which are inferior, constituted of the
Gunas and are transient, while You exist - You who are of the nature of
unbounded and abundant bliss, who has an eternal unchanging form and who
is the source of the enjoyableness of even the objects of the world; Sri
Krsna replies:
