+++
title = "14 दैवी ह्येषा"

+++
7.14 (a) This Maya of Mine consists of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas. Because it is created by Me, the Divine, for purpose of
sport, it is divine in its power and therefore difficult to overcome.
The word Maya is used for the effects of the three Gunas, because it has
got the power of generating wonderful effects as in the case of the
magic of Asuras and Raksasas. See the passages: 'Then the excellent
discus, the flaming Sudarsana, was despatched by the Lord to defend the
boy. The thousand Mayas or wonderfully created weapons of the
evil-designed Sambara were foiled one after another, by that ickly
moving discus, for protecting the body of the boy' (V. P., 1.19. 19-20).
Here the term Maya does not signify the sense of 'false'. Even with
regard to magicians, when the term, Mayavin (one who possesses Maya) is
used, there is origination of real impressions with the aid of certain
incantations, herbs etc., though the objects created are illusory
things. Accordingly the term Maya denotes the incantations, herbs etc.,
which have got the power of creating real impressions. Inasmuch as the
sense of the term should be invariable, following the usage in all
cases, the term Maya can be applied to the illusory objects, only in a
secondary sense, while its primary sense in regard to the real
impressions generated in the mind. It is just like in the statement 'The
cots cry.' The Maya of the Lord, which is absolutely real and which
consists of the Gunas, is alone taught in the texts like, 'Know then
Maya to be the Prakrti and the possessor of the Maya to be the great
Lord' (Sve. U., 4.10). It not only obscures the essential nature of the
Lord but also creates the condition of the mind that sees its objects as
enjoyable. Therefore, the entire universe, deluded by the Lord's Maya,
does not know the Lord who is of the nature of boundless beatitude. (On
the other hand they feel objects set forth by Maya as enjoyable). Sri
Krsna teaches the way of deliverance from Maya: (b) But those who take
refuge in Me alone - Me whose resolves are always true, who has supreme
compassion, and who is the refuge of all beings without exception and
without consideration of their particular status - such persons shall
pass beyond this Maya of Mine consisting of the three Gunas. The meaning
is that they worship Me alone, renouncing the Maya. Why, then do all not
take recourse to refuge in the Lord which is conducive to the worship of
the Lord;
