+++
title = "19 बहूनाञ् जन्मनामन्ते"

+++
7.19 Further after passing through innumerable auspicious births, one
gets the knowledge: 'I find my sole joy as a Sesa of Vasudeva. I find my
essence, existence and activities to be dependent on Him. He is superior
over all others on account of His innumerable auspicious attributes.'
Conseent to this knowledge he resorts to Me, i.e., meditates on Me,
realising, 'Vasudeva alone is my highest end and also the means for
attaining it, and whatever other desire remains in the mind, He alone is
all that too for me'. Such a great-souled person, i.e., great-minded man
is hard to find. It is very hard to find such persons in this world.
This is the only meaning of the statement that 'Vasudeva is all,'
because of the topic having been begun with the statements: 'For I am
very dear to the man of knowledge' (7.17) and 'For he, integrated, is
devoted to Me alone as the highest end' (7.18). It is so, also because
that Jnanin whose traits are given here, possesses the same alities as
the man of knowledge described earlier. For, it has been said that the
two Prakrtis, the animate and the inanimate, have their sole essence in
being the Sesa (dependants) of the Supreme Person in the verses
beginning with 'Earth, water' (7.4) and ending with, 'Ego-sense, thus My
Prakrti is divided eightfold. This is my lower (Prakrti). But know that
which is other than this (lower nature) and forms the life-principle to
be the higher Prakrti' (7.4-5). Then take the beginning from 'I am the
origin and dissolution of the whole universe. There is nothing higher
than Myself, O Arjuna' (7.6-7), and ending with, 'Know that all the
states of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are from Me alone. But I am not in
them. They are in Me' (7.12). It has been declared in these texts that
the two Prakrtis, both in their states of cause and effect, depend upon
Him for their essence, existence and activities and that the Supreme
Person is superior to everything in all respects. Therefore the knower
of this truth alone is here spoken of as a man of knowledge or as one
knowing 'All this is Vasudeva.' \[The purpose of this explanation is to
eliminate any pure monistic slant to this passage.\] Sri Krsna now
explains the rarity of finding such a person of knowledge.
