+++
title = "30 साधिभूताधिदैवम् माम्"

+++
7.30 Here, other alified persons distinct from those already mentioned
(i.e., those who desire Kaivalya) are to be understood, because of the
mention again of the term 'those' (ye). Even though the declaration -
those seekers of fortune who know Me as being connected with the higher
material entities' (Adhibhuta) and 'with that which is higher to
divinities' (Adhidaiva) i.e., the self in Its lordship - resmles a
repetition, it is really an injunction on account of the meaning not
being known otherwise. The statement of knowing Me as being connected
with the sacrifice is also enjoined as an injunction for all the three
types of differently alified aspirants (those who aspire for Kaivalya,
wealth and liberation) without any difference, because of the nature of
the subject matter, that being sacrificial. None of the three types of
aspirants can give up the performance of the great sacrifices and other
rituals in the form of periodical and occasional rituals. They know Me
at the hour of death in a way corresponding with their objectivies.
Because of the term ca (too) in 'they too,' those who have been
mentioned before as 'striving for release from old age and death' are
also to be understood along with the others as knowing Me at the hour of
death. By this, even the Jnanin knows Me as being connected with the
sacrifice on account of the nature of the meaning of the subject treated
(i.e., sacrifice). They also know Me even at the hour of death in a way
corresponding with their objective. The purport is that, besides the
others mentioned earlier like the knower of the Self, those others who
are now described as knowing Him with Adhibhuta, Adhidaiva and Adhiyajna
are to be included among those who will know Him at the time of death.
