+++
title = "11 ये यथा"

+++
4.11 Yatha, according to the manner in which, the purpose for which,
seeking, whatever fruit; prapadyante, they approach; mam, Me; aham, I;
bhajami, favour; tan, them; tatha eva, in that very manner, by granting
that fruit. This is the idea. For they are not seekers of Liberation. It
is certainly impossible for the same person to be a seeker of Liberation
and, at the same time, a seeker of rewards (of actions). Therefore, by
granting fruits to those who hanker after fruits; by granting Knowledge
to those who follow what has been stated (in the scriptures) and are
seekers of Liberation, but do not hanker after rewards; and by granting
Liberation to those who are men of wisdom and are monks aspiring for
Liberation; and so also by removing the miseries of those who suffer- in
these ways I favour them just according to the manner, in which they
approach Me. This is the meaning. On the other hand, I do not favour
anybody out of love or aversion, or out of delusion. Under all
circumstances, O son of Prtha, manusyah, human beings; anuvartante,
follow; sarvasah, in every way; mama, My; vartma, path, \[The paths
characterized by Knowledge and by action (rites and duties).\] the path
of God who am omnipresent. By 'human beings' are meant those people who
become engaged in their respective duties to which they are alified
according to the results they seek. 'If Your wish to be favourable is
the same towards all creatures on account of the absence of the defects
of love and aversion in You who are God, and You are there with Your
capacity to grant all rewards, why then do not all, becoming desirous of
Liberation, take refuge in You alone with the very knowledge that
Vasudeva is everything;' As to that, hear the reason for this:
