+++
title = "12 काङ्क्षन्तः कर्मणाम्"

+++
4.12 Kanksantah, longing for, praying for; siddim, fruition,
fructification of the results; karmanam, of actions; yajante, they
worship; iha, here, in this world; devatah, the gods, Indra, Fire and
others- which accords with the Upanisadic text, 'While he who worships
another god thinking, "He is one, and I am another," does not know. He
is like an animal to the gods' (Br. 1.4.10). \[This text points out that
the reason for adoring other deties is the ignorance of the Self, which
gives rise to the ideas of difference between the worshipped and the
worshipper. As animals are beneficial to human beings, so also is the
sacrificer to the gods, because through oblations he works for their
pleasure!\] Hi, for, in the case of those, indeed, who sacrifice to
other gods and long for results; (siddhih, success; karmaja, from
action;) bhavati, comes; ksiparm, ickly; manuse-loke, in the human
world, because the authority of the scriptures extends only over the
human world. By the specific statement, 'For, in the human world,
success comes ickly,' the Lord shows that results of actions can accrue
even in the other worlds. The difference lies in this that, in the human
world eligibility for \[Ast. and A.A. omit 'adhikara, elegibility for',
and read karmani.-Tr.\] actions is according to castes, stages of life,
etc. The fruition of the results of those actions of persons who are
eligible according to castes, stages of life, etc. comes ickly. What is
the reason for the rule that the competence for rites and duties
according to castes, stages of life, etc. obtains only in the human
world, but not in the other worlds; Or:-It has been said, 'Human beings,
having such divisions as castes, stages of life, etc., follow My path in
every way.' For what reason, again, do they as a rule follow Your path
alone, but not of others; This is being answered:
