+++
title = "13 चातुर्वर्ण्यम् मया"

+++
4.13 Catur-varnyam-meaning the same as catvarah varnah, the four castes;
srstam, have been created; maya, by Me who am God, which accords with
such Vedic texts as, 'The Brahmanas were His face৷৷.' (Rg. 10.90.12);
guna-karma-vibhagasah, through a classification of the gunas and duties.
\[A.G. writes: guna-vibhagena karma-vibhagah, classification of the
duties, determined by the classification of the gunas.-Tr\] By the gunas
are meant sattva, rajas and tamas (see note under 2.45; also see Chapter
14). As to that, the control of the mind and body, austerity, etc. are
the duties of the Brahmanas, who are sattvika, i.e. have a predominance
of the ality of sattva (purity, goodness, etc.). Courage, valour, etc.
are the duties of the Ksatriyas, in whom sattva becomes secondary and
rajas (passion, attachment, etc.) preponderates. Agriculture etc. are
the duties of the Vaisya, in whom tamas (indolence, ignorance, etc.) is
secondary and rajas is predominant. Service is the only duty of the
Sudra, in whom rajas is secondary and tamas predominates (see chapters
14, 16,17 and 18). In this way, the four castes have been created by Me
through a classification of the gunas and duties. This is the idea. And
these four castes do not prevail in the other worlds. Hence the
specification, 'in the human world'. 'Well, in that caste, by virtues of
Your being he agent of the acts of creation of the four castes,etc. You
become subject tothe conseence of those actions; Therefore you are not
eternally free and the eternal Lord!' This is being answered: Api, even
though; I am kartaram, the agent; tasya, of that act, from the empirical
standpoint of maya; still, from the highest standpoint, viddhi, know;
mam, Me; to be akartaram, a non-agent; and therefore, also know Me to be
avyayam, changeless, not subject to the cycle of births and deaths. 'In
reality, however, I am not the agent of those actions of which you think
I am the agent.' Because
