+++
title = "18 कर्मण्यकर्म यः"

+++
4.18 Since engagement and non-engagement (in action) depend on an agent,
therefore, yah, he who; pasyet, ie. pasyati, finds; akarma, inaction,
absence of action; karmani, in action-karma means whatever is done,
action in general; in tha action-; and yah, who; finds karma, action;
akarmani, in inaction, in the absence of action; sah, he; is buddhiman,
a wise one; manusyesu, among men. All dealings involving an act,
accessories, etc. exist certainly on the plane of ignorance, \[Both
engagement and non-engagement presuppose agentship and an act of some
kind. This, however, holds good on the plane of ignorance, but not on
that of Self-realization.\] only so long as one has not attained to the
Reality. He is a yogi, yuktah, engaged in yoga; and a krtsna-karma-krt,
performer of all actions. One who discriminates between action and
actions. One who discriminates between action and inaction is praised
thus. Objection: Well, what is meant by this contradictory statement,
'He who finds inaction in action', and 'action in inaction'; For action
cannot become inaction, nor inaction action. That being so, how can a
witness have (such) an incongruous perception; Vedantin: Is it not that
\[Ast. reads na in place of nanu.-Tr.\] to an ordinary foolsih observer,
that which is reality is inaction appears as action, and similarly,
action itself as inaction; That being so, in order to show things as
they are the Lord says, 'He who finds inaction in action', etc.
Therefore there is no incongruity. Besides, the alifications such as
'intelligent' etc. (thus) become logical. And by saying, 'there is
something to be known', is implied the perception of things as they are.
Moreover, freedom from evil cannot follow from an erroneous perception;
whereas it has been said, 'by knowing which you will become free from
evil'. Therefore, one account of action and inaction being perceived
contrarily by the creatures, the Lord's utterance, 'he who finds
inaction in action,' etc. is for dispelling their contrary perception.
Not that in the empirical plane inaction has action as its receptacle,
like a plum in a bowl! Nor even has action inaction as its receptacle,
because inaction is a negation of action. Therefore, action and inaction
are actually perceived contrarily by the ordinary persons-like seeing
water in a mirage, or silver in nacre. Objection: Is it not that to
every one action is action itself; Never is there an exception to this.
Vedantin: That is not so, becuase when a boat is moving, motionless
trees on the bank appear to move in the opposite direction to a man on
the boat; an absence of motion is noticed in distant moving things which
are not near one's eyes. Similarly, here also occurs the contrary
perceptions, viz seeing action in inaction under the idea, 'I am doing',
\[Ast. omits 'aham karomi iti, under the idea, "I am doing"'.-Tr.\] and
seeing, inaction in acion,-because of which it is said, 'He who finds
inaction in action,' etc. in order to eliminate them. As such, although
this answer has been given more than once, still a man becomes
repeatedly deluded under the influence of a totally opposite perception.
And forgetting the truth that has been heard again and again, he
repeatedly raises false issues and estions! And therefore, observing
that the subject is difficult to understand, the Lord gives His answer
again and again. The absence of action in the Self-well-known from the
Vedas, Smrtis and logic, as stated in, '(It is said that) This is
unmanifest; This is inconceivable' (2.25), 'Never is this One born, and
never does It die' (2.20; Ka. 1.2.18), etc.-has been and will be spoken
of. The contrary perception of action in that actionless Self, i.e. in
inaction, is very deep-rooted, owing to which 'even the intelligent are
confounded as to what is action and what is inaction.' And as a
conseence of the superimposition of aciton pertaining to the body etc.
on the Self, there arises such ideas as, 'I am an agent; this is my
action; its result is to be enjoyed by me.' Similarly, with the idea, 'I
shall remain iet, whery I shall be free from exertion, free from
activity, and happy', and superimposing on the Self the cessation of
activities pertaining to the body and organs and the resulting
happiness, a man imagines, 'I shall not do anything; I shall sit ietly
and happily.' That being so, the Lord says, 'he who finds inaction in
action,' etc. with a view to removing this contrary understanding of
man. And here in this world, though action belonging to the body and
organs continues to be action, still it is superimposed by everyone on
the acitonless, unchanging Self, as a result of which even a learned
person things, 'I act.' Therefore, in action (karmani), which is
universally considered by all people to be inherent in the Self, like
the perception of motion in the (stationary) trees on the bank of a
river-(in that action) he who contrariwise finds the fact of inaction,
like perceiving absence of motion in those trees-. And, in inaction
(akarmani) in the cessation of the activities pertaining to the body and
organs and ascribed to the Self in the same way that actions are
ascribed-, in that action, he who sees action because of egoism being
implicit in the idea, 'I am happily seated ietly, without doing
anything'-; he who knows thus the distinction between action and
inaction, is wise, is learned among men; he is engaged in yoga, he is a
yogi, and a performer of all actions. And he, freed from evil, attains
fulfilment. This is the meaning. This verse is interpreted by some in
another way. How; (Thus:) 'Since the daily obligatory duties
(nityakarmas) certainly have no results when performed as a dedication
to God, therefore, in a secondary sense, they are said to be inaction.
Again, the non-performance of these (nitya-karmas) is inaction; since
this produces an evil result, therefore it is called action, verily in a
figurative sense. That being so, he who sees inaction in the daily
obligatory duties (nitya-karmas) owing to the obsence of their
results-in the same way as a cow that does not yield milk is said to be
not a cow, though in reality it is so-so also, in the non-performance of
the daily obligatory duties, i.e. in inaction, he who sees action since
that yields results such as hell etc৷৷.' This explanation is not
logical, because freedom from evil as a result of such knowledge is
unreasonable, and the utterance of the Lord in the sentence, '৷৷.by
knowing which you will become freed from evil', will be contradicted.
How; Even if it be that liberation from evil follows from the
performance of nitya-karmas, it cannot, however, follow from the
knowledge of the absence of their results. For it has not been enjoined
(anywhere) that knowledge of the nityakarmas (themselves), leads to the
result of freedom from evil. Nor has this been stated here by the Lord
Himself. Hery is refuted the 'seeing of action in inaction' \[As
explained by others.-Tr.\], for (according to the opponent) 'seeing of
action in inaction' has not been enjoined here \[Here, in the present
verse.\] as a duty, but (what has been enjoined is) merely that
performance of the nityakarmas is obligatory. Moreover, no result can
accrue from the knowledge that evil arises from non-performance of
nityakramas. Nor even has non-performance of nityakarmas. been enjoined
as something that should be known. Besides, such results as freedom from
evil, wisdom, engagement in yoga, and being a performer of all actions
cannot reasonably follow from a false perception of action as inaction.
Nor is this a eulogy of false perception. \[The stated results accrue
from correct knowledge, not from false perception; and correct knowledge
alone is praise-worthy.\] Indeed, false perception is itself an abvious
form of evil! How can it bring about liberation from another evil;
Surely, darkness does not become the remover of darkness! Opponent:
Well, the seeing of inaction in action, or the seeing of action in
inaction-that is not a false perception. Vadantin: What then; Opponent:
It is a figurative statement based on the existence or the non-existence
of results. Vedantin: Not so, because there is no such scriptural
statement that something results from knowing action as inaction and
inaction as action, even in a figurative sense. Besides, nothing
particular is gained by rejecting what is heard of (in the scriptures)
and imagining something that is not. Further, it was possible (for the
Lord) to express in His own words that there is no result from the
nityakarmas, and that by their non-performance one would have to go to
hell. Under such circumstances, what was the need of the ambiguous
statement, 'He who sees inaction in action,' etc., which is misleading
to others; This being the case, such an explanation by anyone will be
clearly tantamount to imagining that statement of the Lord as meant for
deluding people. Moreover, this subject-matter (performance of
nityakarmas) is not something to be protected with mystifying words. It
is not even logical to say that the subject-matter will become easy for
comprehension if it is stated again and again through different words.
For, the subject-matter that was stated more clearly in, 'Your right is
for action alone' (2.47), does not need any repetition. And everwhere it
is said that whatever is good and ought to be practised deserves to be
understood; anything purposeloss does not deserve to be known. Besides,
neither is false knowledge worth aciring nor is the semblance of an
object presented by it worth knowing. Nor even can any evil, which is an
entity, arise from the non-performance of nityakarmas, which is a
non-entity, for there is the statement, 'Of the unreal there is no
being' (2.16), and (in the Upanisad) it has been pointed out, 'How can
existence originate from nonexistence;' (Ch. 4.2.2). Since emergence of
the existent from the nonexistent has been denied, therefore anyone's
assertion that the existent originates from the nonexistent will amount
to saying that a non-entity becomes an entity, and an entity becomes a
non-entity! And that is not rational because it runs counter to all the
means of valid knowledge. Further, the scriptures cannot enjoin
fruitless actions, they being naturally painful; and it is illogical
that what is painful should be done intentionally. Also, if it is
admitted that falling into hell results from their non-performance (i.e.
of the nityakarmas), then that too is surely a source of evil. In either
case, whether one undertakes them or not, the scriptures will be
imagined to be useless. And there will be a contradiction with your own
standpoint when, after holding that the nityakarmas are fruitless, you
assert that they lead to Liberation. Therefore, the meaning of 'He who
finds inaction in action,' etc. is just what stands out literally. And
the verse has been explained by us accordingly. The aforesaid perception
of 'inaction in action,' etc. is being praised:
