+++
title = "19 यस्य सर्वे"

+++
4.19 Budhah, the wise, the knowers of Brahman; ahuh, call; tam, him;
panditam, learned, in the real sense; yasya, whose, of the one who
perceives as stated above; samarambhah, actions-whatever are undertaken;
are sarve, all; kama-sankalpa-varjitah, devoid of desires and the
thoughts which are their (desires') causes (see 2.62)-i.e., (those
actions) are performed as mere movements, without any selfish purpose:
if they are performed by one (already) engaged in actions, then they are
for preventing people from going astray, and if they are done by one who
has withdrawn from actions, then they are merely for the maintenance of
the body-; and jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam, whose actions have been burnt
away by the fire of wisdom. Finding inaction etc. in action etc. is
jnana, wisdom; that itself is agnih, fire. He whose actions, karma,
described as good and bad, have been dagdhani, burnt away by that fire
of wisdom, is jnana-agni-dagdha-karma. However, one who is a perceiver
of 'inaction' etc. \[Perceiver of inaction etc.: He who knows the truth
about action and inaction as explained before.-Tr.\] is free from
actions owing to the very fact of his seeing 'inaction' etc. He is a
monk, who acts merely for the purpose of maintaining the body. Being so,
he does not engage in actions although he might have done so before the
dawn of discrimination. He again who, having been engaged in actions
under the influence of past tendencies, later on becomes endowed with
the fullest Self-knowledge, he surely renounces (all) \[Ast. adds this
word sarva, all.-Tr.\] actions along with their accessories as he does
nnot find any purpose in activity. For some reason, if it becomes
impossible to renounce actions and he, for the sake of preventing people
from going astray, even remains engaged as before in actions-without
attachment to those actions and their results because of the absence of
any selfish purpose-, still he surely does nothing at all! His actions
verily become 'inaction' because of having been burnt away by the fire
of wisdom. By way of pointing out this idea, the Lord says:
