+++
title = "20 त्यक्त्वा कर्मफलासङ्गम्"

+++
4.20 With the help of the above-mentioned wisdom, tyaktva, having given
up the idea of agentship; and phala-asangam, attachment to the results
of action; he who is nitya-trptah, ever-trptah, ever-contented, i.e. has
no hankering for objects; and nirasrayah, dependent on nothing-. Asraya
means that on which a person leans, desiring to achieve some human goal.
The idea is that he is dependent of any support which may be a means of
attaining some coveted seen or unseen result. In reality, actions done
by a man of Knowledge are certainly inactions, since he is endowed with
the realization of the actionless Self. Actions together with their
accessories must be relinished by one who has become thus, because they
have no end to serve. This being so, api, even though; he remains
abhi-pravrttah, engaged as before; karmani, in actions-getting out of
those (actions) being impossible-, either with the intention of
preventing people from going astray or with a view to avoiding the
censure of the wise people; sah, he; eva, really; na karoti, does not
do; kincit, anything, because he is endued with the realization of the
actionless Self. \[From the subjective standpoint of the enlightened
there are no actions, but ordinary people mistakenly think them to be
actions, which in reality are a mere semblance of it.\] On the other
hand, one who is the opposite of the above-mentioned one, (and) in whom,
even before undertaking works, has dawned the realization of his
identity with Brahman, the all-pervasive, inmost, actionless Self;
who,being bereft of solicitation for desirable objects seen or unseen,
has renounced actions along with their accessories, by virtue of seeing
no purpose to be served by undertaking actions meant to secure some seen
or unseen result, and makes effort only for the maintenance of the body,
he, the monk steadfast in Knowledge, becomes free. Hence, in order to
express this idea the Lord says:
