+++
title = "21 निराशीर्यतचित्तात्मा"

+++
4.21 Nirasih, one who is without solicitation-one from whom asisah
\[Asih is a kind of desire that can be classed under prayer. (Some
translate it as desire, hope.-Tr.)\], solicitations, have departed;
yata-citta-atma, who has the mind and organs under control-one by whom
have been controlled (yatau) both the internal organ (citta) and the
external aggregate of body and organs (atma); (and) is
tyakta-sarva-parigrahah, \[ Parigraha: receiving, accepting,
possessions, belongings.-V.S.A\] totally without possessions- one by
whom have been renounced (tyaktah) all (sarvah) possessions
(parigrahah); na apnoti, he does not incur; kilbisam, sin, in the form
of evil as also rigtheousness-to one aspiring for Liberation, even
righteousness is surely an evil because it brings bondage-; \[Here Ast.
adds tasmat tabhyam mukto bhavati samsarat mukto bhavati ityarthah,
therefore, he becomes free from both of them, i.e. he becomes liberated
from transmigration.-Tr.\] kurvan, by performing; karma, actions;
kevalam, merely; sariram, for the purpose of maintaining the
body-without the idea of agenship even with regard to these (actions).
Further, in the expression, 'kevalam sariram karma', do the words
sariram karma mean 'actions done by the body' or 'actions merely for the
purpose of maintaining the body; Again, what does it matter if by (the
words) sariram karma is meant 'actions done by the body' or 'actions
merely for the purpose of maintaning the body; The answer is: If by
sariram karma is meant actions done by the body, then it will amount to
a contradiction \[Contradiction of the scriptures.\] when the Lord says,
'one does not incur sin by doing with his body any action meant for seen
or unseen purposes, even though it be prohibited.' Even if the Lord were
to say that 'one does not incur sin by doing with his body some
scripturally sanctioned action intended to secure a seen or an unseen
end', then there arises the contingency of His denying something (some
evil) that has not come into being! (Further,) from the specification,
sariram karma kurvan (by doing actions with the body), and from the use
of the word kevala (only), it will amount to saying that one incurs sin
by performing actions, called righteous and unrighteous, which can be
accomplished with the mind and speech and which come within the purview
of injunction and prohibition. Even there, the statement that one incurs
sin by performing enjoined actions through the mind and speech will
involve a contradiction; even in the case of doing what is prohibited,
it will amount to a mere purposeless restatement of a known fact. On the
other hand, when the sense conveyed by sariram karma is taken as
acctions merely for the purpose of maintaining the body, then the
implication will be that he does not do any other work as can be
accomplished physically, orally, or mentally, which are known from
injunctions and prohibitions (of the scriptures) and which have in view
seen or unseen results; while he appears to people to be working with
those very body (speech) etc. merely for the purpose of maintaining the
body, yet he does not incur sin by merely making movements of the body
etc., because from the use of the word kevala, (merely) it follows that
he is devoid of the sense of agentship implicit in the idea, 'I do.'
Since there is no possibility of a person who has reached such a state
incurring evil as suggest by the word sin, therefore he does not become
subject to the evil of transmigration. That is to say, he certainly
becomes free without any obstacle since he has all his actions burnt
away by the fire of wisdom. This verse is only a reiteration of the
result of full illumination stated earlier. It becomes faultless by
accepting the interpretation of sariram karma thus. In the case of the
monk who has renounced all possessions, since owning food etc. meant for
the bare sustenance of the body is absent, therefore it becomes
imperative to beg for alms etc. for the upkeep of the body. Under this
circumstance, by way of pointing out the means of obtaining food etc.
for the maintenance of the body of a monk as permitted by the text,
'What comes unasked for, without forethought and spontaneously৷৷.'
\[Unasked for: what comes before the monk gets ready for going out for
alms; without forethought: alms that are not given with abuses, and have
not fallen on the ground, but collected from five or seven houses
without any plan; spontaneously: alms brought to one spontaneously by
devoted people.\] (Bo. Sm. 21. 8. 12) etc., the Lord says:
