+++
title = "22 यदृच्छालाभसन्तुष्टो"

+++
4.22 Yadrccha-labha-santustah, remaining satisfied with what comes
unasked for-yadrccha-labha means coming to possess something without
having prayed for it; feeling contented with that-.
Dvandva-atitah,having transcended the dualities-one is said to be beyond
dualities when his mind is not distressed even when afflicted by such
opposites as heat and cold, etc.-. Vimatsarah, being free from spite,
from the idea of enmity; and samah, eipoised; siddhau ca asiddhau, is
success and failure, with regard to things that come unasked for-. The
monk who is such, who is eipoised, not delighted or sorrowful in getting
or not getting food etc. for the sustenance of the body, who sees
inaction etc. in action etc., who is ever poised in the realization of
the Self as It is, who, with regard to the activities accomplished by
the body etc. in the course of going about for alms etc. for the bare
maintenance of the body, is ever clearly conscious of the fact, 'I
certainly do not anything; the organs act on the objects of the organs'
(see 5.8; 3.28), he, realizing the absence of agentship in the Self,
certainly does not do any actions like going about for alms etc. But
when, abserving similarly with common human behaviour, agentship is
attributed to him by ordinary poeple, then he (apparently) becomes an
agent with regard to such actions as moving about for alms etc. However,
from the standpoint of his own realization which has arisen from the
valid means of knowledge presented in the scriptures, he is surely not
an agent. He, to whom is thus ascribed agentship by others, na
nibadhyate, is not bound; api, even; krtva, by performing such actions
as moving about for alms merely for the maintenance of the body, because
action which is a source of bondage has been burnt away along with its
cause by the fire of wisdom. Thus, this is only a restatement of what
has been said earilier. When a person who has already started works
becomes endowed with the realization of the identity of the Self with
the actionless Brahman, then it follows that in the case of that man,
who has experienced the absence of agentship, actions and purposes in
the Self, actions become relinished. But if this becomes impossible for
some reason and he continues to be engaged in those acitons as before,
still he certainly does not do anything. This absence of action has been
shown in the verse, 'Having given up attachment to the results of
action৷৷.' (20). Of that very person with regard to whom has been shown
the absence of aciton-
