+++
title = "24 ब्रह्मार्पणम्"

+++
4.24 Brahma-arpanam, the ladle is Brahman: The knower of Brahman
perceives the instrument with which he offers oblation in the fire as
Brahman Itself. He perceives it as not existing separately from the
Self, as one sees the non-existence of silver in nacre. In this sense it
is that Brahman Itself is the ladle-just as what appears as silver is
only narcre. (The two words brahma and arpanam are not parts of a
compound word, samasa.) The meaning is that, to a knower of Brahman,
what is perceived in the world as ladle is Brahman Itself. Similarly,
brahma-havih, the oblations is Brahman: To him, what is seen as
oblations is nothing but Brahman. In the same way, brahma-agnau, (-this
is a compound word-) in the fire of Brahman: The fire into which
oblation is hutam, poured; brahmana, by Brahman, by the agent, is
Brahman Itself. The meaning is that Brahman Itself is the agent (of the
offering). That he makes the offering-the act of offering-, that is also
Brahman. And the result that is gantavyam, to be reached by him; that
also is brahma eva, surely Brahman. Brahma-karma-samadhina, by him who
has concentration on Brahman as the objective: Brahman Itself is the
objective (karma); he who has concentration (samadhi) on That is
brahma-karma-samdhih. The goal to be reached by him is Brahman alone.
Thus, even the action undertaken by one who desires to prevent mankind
from going astray is in reality inaction, for it has been sublated by
the realization of Brahman. This being so, in the case of the monk from
whom aciton has dropped off, who has renounced all activity, viewing his
Knowledge as a (kind of) sacrifice, too, becomes all the more
justifiable from the point of view of praising full realization. That
is, whatever is well known as ladle etc. in the context of a sacrifice,
all that, in the context of the Self, is Brahman Itself to one who has
realized the supreme Truth. If not so, then, since all in Brahman, it
would have been uselesss to specifically mention ladle etc. as Brahman.
Therefore, all actions cease to exist for the man of realization who
knows that Brahman Itself is all this. And this follows also from the
absence (in him) of the idea of accessories. \[See note on p.211.-Tr.\]
For the act called 'sacarifice' is not seen to exist without being in
association with the idea of accessories. All such acts as Agnihotra
etc. are associated with the ideas of such accessories as making an
offering etc. to the particular gods who are revealed in the scriptures,
and with the idea of agentship as also desire for results. But they are
not found bereft of the ideas of such distinctions as exist among
action, accessories and results, or unassociated with the ideas of
agentship hankering for results. This (apparent) (activity of the man of
Knowledge), however, stands dissociated from the ideas of differences
among the accessories like ladle etc., actions and results, which get
destroyed by the Knowledge of Brahman. Hence, it is inaction to be sure.
And thus has it been shown in, 'He who finds inaction in action' (18),
'he really does not do anything even though engaged in action' (20),
'the organs act on the objects of the organs' (3.28), 'Remaining
absorbed in the Self, the knower of Reality should think, "I certainly
do not do anything"' (5.8), etc. While pointing out thus, the Lord
demolishes in various places the ideas of differences among actions,
accessories and results. And it is also seen in the case of rites such
as Agnihotra undertaken for results (kamya), that the Agnihotra etc.
cease to be (kamya) rites undertaken for selfish motives when the desire
for their results is destroyed. Similarly, it is seen that actions done
intentionally and unintentionally yeild different results. So, here as
well, in the case of one who has his ideas of distinctions among
accessories like ladle etc., actions and results eliminated by the
knowledge of Brahman, even activites which are merely external movements
amount to inaction. Hence it was said, 'gets totally destroyed.' Here
some say: That which is Brahman is the ladle etc. It is surely Brahman
Itself which exists in the five forms \[Asscessories that can be
indicated by the five grammatical case-ending, viz Nominative,
Objective, Instrumental, Dative and Locative. (As for instance, the
sacrificer, oblation, ladle, sacrificial fire, and Brahman.-Tr.) of
accessories such as the ladle etc. and it is Itself which undertakes
actions. There the ideas of ladle etc. are not eradicated, but the idea
of Brahman is attributed to the ladle etc. as one does the ideas of
Visnu etc. to images etc., or as one does the idea of Brahman ot name
etc. Reply: True, this could have been so as well if the context were
not meant for the praise of jnanayajna (Knowledge considered as a
sacrifice). Here, however, after presenting full realization as
expressed by the word jnana-yajna, and the varieties of rites as
referred to by the word yajna (sacrifice), Knowledge has been praised by
the Lord in, 'Jnana-yajna (Knowledge considered as a sacrifice) is
greater than sacrifices reiring materials' (33). And in the present
context, this statement, 'the ladle is Brahman' etc., is capable of
presenting Knowledge as a sacrifice; otherwise, since Brahman is
everything, it will be purposeless to speak specially only of ladle etc.
as Brahman. But those who maintain that one has to superimpose the idea
of Brahman on the ladle etc., like superimposing the idea of Visnu and
others on images etc. and of Brahman on name etc., for them the
knowledge of Brahma stated (in the verse) cannot be the intended
subject-matter dealt with here, because according to them ladle etc. are
the (primary) objects of knowledge (in the context of the present
verse). Besides, knowledge in the form of superimposition of an idea
cannot lead to Liberation as its result; and what is said here is,
'Brahman alone in to be realized by him'. Also, it is inconsistent to
maintain that the result of Liberation can be achieved without full
realization. And it goes against the context-the context being of full
realization. This is supported by the fact that (the subject of ) full
realization is introduced in the verse, 'He who finds inaction in
action,' and at the end (of this chapter) the conclusion pertains to
that very subject-matter. The chapter comes to a close by eulozing full
realization itself in, 'Jnana-yajna (Knowledge considered as a
sacrifice) is greater than sacrifices reiring materials', 'Achieving
Knowledge, one৷৷.attains supreme Peace,' (39) etc. That being so, it is
unjustifiable to suddenly say out of context that one has to superimpose
the idea of Brahman on the ladle etc. like the superimposition of the
idea of Visnu on images. Therefore this verse bears the meaing just as
it has been already explained. As to that, after having presented
Knowledge as a sacrifice, other sacrifices also are being mentioned now
in, the verses beginning with, '(Other yogis undertake) sacrifice to
gods alone,' etc., for eulogizing that Knowledge:
