+++
title = "25 दैवमेवापरे यज्ञम्"

+++
4.25 Apare, other; yoginah, yogis, ritualists; pari-upasate, undertake;
yajnam, sacrifice; daivam, to gods; eva, alone. A sacrifice by which the
gods are adored is daiva-yajna; they perform only that. This is the
meaning. Brahma-agnau, in the fire of Brahman: By the word brahman is
meant That which is referred to in such sentences as, 'Brahman is Truth,
knowledge and infinite' (Tai. 2.1), 'Knowledge, Bliss, Brahman' (Br.
3.9.28), 'the Brahman that is immediate and direct-the self that is
within all' (Br.3.4.1), which is devoid of all worldly characteristiscs
like hunger etc. and which is beyond all particular alifications-as
stated in, 'Not this, not this' (Br.4.4.22). That which is Brahman is
the fire. \[Brahman is called fire because, as reflected in wisdom, It
burns away everything, i.e. ignorance, or because everything merges into
It during dissolution (pralaya).\] And it is spoken of as Brahmagni with
a view to referring to It as that into which the offering is made. In
that fire of Brahman, apare, others, other knowers of Brahman;
upa-juhvati, offer; yajnam, the Self, which is referred to by the word
yajna (sacrifice), it, having, been presented as a synonym of the
Self;-that Self, which is a sacrifice, which is reality is verily the
supreme Brahman, which is associated with such limiting adjuncts as the
intellect etc., which is associated with all the alities of the limiting
adjuncts superimposed on it, and which is the oblation, (they offer)
yajnena, by the Self itself as described above. The offering (of the
Self) in that (Brahman) is nothing but the realization of that Self
which is assoicated with the limiting adjuncts to be the supreme Brahman
which is free from adjuncts. The monks, steadfast in the realization of
the identity of Brahman and the Self, make that offering. This is the
meaning. Beginning with, 'The ladle is Brahman' etc., this sacrifice
characterized as full realization is being included among such
sacrifices as daiva-yajna etc. with a view to eulogizing it in the
verses beginning with, 'O destroyer of enemies, jnana-yajna is greater
than the sacrifices involving (sacrificial) materials'.
