+++
title = "29 अपाने जुह्वति"

+++
4.29 Pranayama-parayanah, constantly practising control of the vital
forces-i.e. they practise a form of pranayama called Kumbhaka (stopping
the breath either inside or outside) \['Three sorts of motion of
Pranayama (control of the vital forces) are, one by which we draw the
breath in, another by which we throw it out, and the third action is
when the breath is held in the lungs or stopped from entering the
lungs.'-C.W., Vol.I, 1962, p. 267. Thus, there are two kinds of
Kumbhaka-internal and external.\]-; prana-apana-gati ruddhva, by
stopping the movements of the outgoing and the incoming breaths-the
outgoing of breath (exhalation) through the mouth and the nostrils is
the movement of the Prana; as opposed to that, the movement of Apana is
the going down (of breath) (inhalation); these constitute the
prana-apana-gati, movements of Prana and Apana; by stopping these; some
juhvati, offer as a sacrifice; pranam, the outgoing breath, which is the
function of Prana; apane, in the incoming breath, which is the function
of Apana-i.e. they practised a form of pranayama called Puraka ('filling
in'); while tatha apare, still others; offer apanam, the incoming
breath; prane, in the outgoing breath, i.e. they practise a form of
pranayama called Recaka ('emptying out'). \[Constantly practising
control of the vital, forces, they perform Kumbhaka after Recaka and
Puraka.\]
