+++
title = "005 लशुनङ् गृञ्जनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Garlic, leeks and onions, mushrooms and all that proceeds from impure things, are unfit to re eaten by twice-born men.—(5).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**लशुना**दयः पदार्था लोके प्रसिद्धा एव । **कवक**शब्दो जातिशब्दः । क्वचित् कृयाकुर् इति प्रसिद्धे ऽर्थे मन्यते । छत्राकानि कवकान्य् एव । तथा हि कवकशब्देन प्रतिषिद्धं छत्राकशब्देन प्रायश्चित्तं वक्ष्यति "छत्राकं विड्वराहं च" इति (म्ध् ५.१९) । न च छत्राकं नाम पदार्थान्तरं प्रसिद्धम् । न चाक्षरवर्णसामान्येन यो यच् छत्राकारस् तं तं छत्राकम् इति युक्तं प्रतिपत्तुम् । तथा सति सुवर्चलादीनां समाचारविरोधी प्रतिषेधः प्राप्नोति । तस्माद् यान्य् एव कवकानि तान्य् एव छत्राकाणि । तथा च निरुक्तकारः- "क्षुण्णम् अहिच्छत्रकं भवति यत् क्षुद्यते" (निर् ५.१६) इति । तेन[^५] यान्य् एतानि भूमाव् अकृष्टायाम् अनुपूर्वजायां च सितवर्णानि जायन्ते तानि च कवकानि । वक्ष्यति च "भौमानि कवकानि" (म्ध् ६.१४) इति । दर्शितं च "पदा क्षुण्णम् इव" इति । पादप्रहारेण यानि क्षुद्यन्ते । यतो यानि वृक्षाद् गुल्माज् जायन्ते तेषां तदाकाराणाम् प्रतिषेधः । कुकुण्डानि कवकानि वैद्यके व्याख्यातानि । एतच् च व्याख्यानं न गवादिशब्दवत् । शाके[^६] कवकशब्दो लोके च प्रयुज्यते । अतो ऽस्य समाचाराद् वैद्यकादिशास्त्रार्थे निश्चयः । प्रदर्शितश् चासौ । लशुनादीनां तु समानवर्णगन्धा अपि विष्णुना प्रतिषिद्धाः (विध् ५१.३) । पाराशरिकायां तु शब्देनैव निषेधः प्रायश्चित्तविशेषार्थ उक्तः "चान्द्रायणम्" इति (च्ड़्। य्ध् १.१७५) । तेन लवतककर्णिकारादीनां प्रतिषेधः । **अमेध्यप्रभवान्य्** अमेध्यजातानि च संसर्गजातानि ।


[^६]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: śāke


[^५]:
     M G add: pādaprahāreṇa (see further down: pādaprahāreṇa yāni kṣudyante)

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुर् मूलवास्तूकवत् केवलामेध्यप्रभवानां युक्तः प्रतिषेधः । ततश् च यान्य् अधिकपुष्ट्यर्थं धान्यशाकादीन्य् अमेध्यक्षेत्रजातानि संसृज्यन्ते तानि न दुष्यन्तीति ।

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्,</u> श्रुतेः[^७] सर्वस्याप्य् अभक्ष्यत्वाद् । इहापि च यद्य् अमेध्यसंसर्गम् अन्तरेण न किंचिद् वस्तूत्पद्यते ततः स्याद् अपि । यतस् तु किंचिन् मेध्याज् जायते किंचित् संसृष्टात् ततो ऽयं प्रतिषेधः केवले ऽमेध्यप्रभवे, न संसृष्टे, अवतिष्ठते । 


[^७]:
     M G 1st ed. has a very different and longer reading: asti hi tatra punaḥ śrutena vṛttau

- मांसस्य सत्य् अपि शुक्रशोणितामेध्यप्रभवत्वे नायं प्रतिषेधः, पृथक्प्रकरणारम्भात् तस्य ॥ ५.५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The terms ‘*garlic*’ &c. are well-known among men.

The term ‘*karaka*’ is the name of a genus, sometimes regarded as the
same as the well-known thing ‘*kryāku*’ (?); mushrooms also are
‘*kavaka*’; as it is forbidden under the name of ‘*kavaka*’, while the
expiatory rite in connection with its eating has been prescribed under
the name of ‘*chatrāka*,’ in verse 19; and no other thing (except the
mushroom) is known by the name ‘*chatruka*’; nor will it be right to
regard, on the basis of verbal similarity alone (between ‘*chatrāka*’
and ‘*chatrākāra*’, umbrella-shaped), all those things as ‘*chatrāka*’
which *resemble the umbrella*, are ‘*chatrākāra*’; as in that case the
prohibition (of ‘*chatrāka*’) would apply also to the *suvarchala* and
other things (which also are *umbrella-shaped*); and this would be
contrary to all usage. Hence we conclude tha ‘*chatrāka*’ and ‘*kavaka*’
are one and the same thing. Says the author of the *Nirukta*—‘The
*chatrāka* is *kṣuṇṇa*, since it is smashed.’ From this it is clear that
the name ‘*kavaka*’ applies to those white shoots that grow out of the
earth that has been ploughed; this is also in keeping with what is going
to be said in connection with^(‘)*kavakas growing out of the earth*’
(6.14); and it has also been just pointed out that the name applies to
what is ‘smashed’ by a stroke of the foot. It is for this reason (of its
being described as *growing out of the earth*, and of its being *mashed*
by a stroke of the foot) that the prohibition (of ‘*kavaka*’) is not
applicable to those vegetable growths that shoot out of the trunks of
trees.

In medicinal treatises the *kukuṇḍa* has been described as ‘*kavaka*’;
but this explanation (of the name on a purely conventional basis) cannot
be accepted in the same manner as that in regard to the term ‘*go*’ and
the rest. Further, as a matter of fact, in ordinary *parlance* the term
‘*kavaka*’ is always applied to a *vegetable*. Hence it is on the basis
of usage that the exact signification of the term, wherever it occurs in
a medical or other scientific treatise, should be ascertained, and we
have already shown what that signification is.

Other things also, which resemble garlic and such things mentioned here,
which resemble these latter in colour and smell, have been forbidden by
Viṣṇu. In the *Smṛti* of Parāśara however the prohibition is by name,
and this for the purpose of prescribing the special Expiatory Rite of
‘*Candrāyaṇa*’ in connection with it. From this it follows that
‘*lavataka*’, ^(‘)*karnikāra*’ and such other things are forbidden.

‘*Things* *proceeding from* *impure substances*’;—those that grow of
impure things or are in contact with them.

Others have declared that it is not right to forbid those things that
grow only out of impure things, these standing on the same footing as
‘*mūlā*’ (radish) ‘*cāstuka*’ (a kind of grass) and such other things
(known to grow out of impure things);—so that the prohibition does not
apply to those grains and vegetables growing in fields specially manured
for the purpose of enriching the harvest.

This however is not right. Because from what the text says it is clear
that all these things are equally unfit to be eaten. Further, what has
been suggested might have been accepted, if it were absolutely
impossible for anything to grow without the use of impure substances.
There are some things however that grow directly out of impure
substances, while there are some that grow out of mere connection with
them; the right view to take therefore is that the prohibition applies
to the former only, and not to the latter.

As regards *meat*, even though it grows out of semen and blood (both
impure substances), yet the present prohibition does not apply to it;
because it has been dealt with in a totally different context.—(5)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 510), which explains
‘*amedhyaprabhavāni*’ as ‘produced directly from human ordure, or in
trees growing from seeds passed with human excreta’;—and in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 448), which reads ‘*karakāṇi*’ (for *kavakāni*) and
explains it as ‘*chatrāka*,’ ‘mushroom;’ and explains
‘*amedhyaprabhavāni*’ as ‘produced from ordure and such things.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.32).—‘Fresh leaves, mushrooms, garlic, and exudations
(from trees).’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.26, 28).—‘Red garlic, white garlic, onion and
mushroom, are not eatable; so says the Brāhmaṇa-text.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.33).—‘For eating garlic, onions, mushrooms, turnips,
Śleśmātaka, exudations from trees, the red sap flowing from incisions,
food pecked at by crows or worried by dogs, or the leavings of a
Śūdra,—*Atikṛcchra* penance.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.3, 34, 36).—‘Garlic, onion, turnips, things having the same
smell, village-pigs, village-cocks, monkey, beef,—on eating these also,
the *Cāndrāyaṇa* is to be performed.—On eating mushrooms and *Kavakas*,
the *Sāntapana* penance;—also exudations, products of unclean things,
the red sap flowing from trees.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.171).—‘Red or white exudations from trees, mushrooms
flowing out of unclean things.’

*Baudhāyana* (Aparārka, p. 247).—‘Of trees planted on unclean ground,
the flowers and fruits are not objectionable.’

*Bhaviṣyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘Garlic, leeks, onions,
mushrooms, brinjals, gourds—by eating these, one’s caste becomes
defiled.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘The circular-shaped
Kuṅkuṇḍa, the Caitya-shaped and Umbrella-shaped mushrooms,—all these
were born out of the body of the Daitya.’

*Taittirīya-Śruti* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 512).—‘The red sap that
flows from trees, or any sap that flows from incisions in trees—that is
harmful.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 513).—‘Garlic, leek, *Vilaya*,
*Sumuhha*, mushrooms, onion,—these the wise man should always avoid.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘The mushroom, the village-hog,
onion, garlic,—on eating these, the Brāhmaṇa, even though he be
conversant with all the Vedas, becomes degraded.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘*Śleśmātaka, Vrajaphalī,
Kausumbha, Nālamastaka*, and leek,—among vegetables, these are not
eatable.—Onion, garlic, *śukta*, exudations, *kucuṇḍa*, the white
brinjal, and *kumbhāṇḍa*,—these one should not eat.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	Garlic, leeks and onions, mushrooms and (all plants), springing from impure (substances), are unfit to be eaten by twice-born men.
</details>
