+++
title = "007 वृथा कृसर-संयावम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Needlessly cooked Rice-sesamum and Butter-sugar-sesamum, milk-rice and flour-cakes, unconsecrated meat, food of the gods and sacrificial viands;—(7)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्र **कृसरसंयावम्** इति समाहारे द्वन्द्वः । तिलैः सह सिद्ध ओदनः **कृसर**शब्देनोच्यते । **संयावो** भोज्यविशेषः सर्पिर्गुडतिलादिकृतः पुरेषु प्रसिद्धः । 

- <u>ये तु</u> यौतेर् मिश्रणार्थत्वाद् यानि मिश्रीकृत्यान्नानि साध्यन्ते मुद्गमकुष्ठकादिभिस्[^११] तानि **संयाव**शब्देनोच्यन्ते इति तेषां कृसरग्रहणम् अनर्थकम् । सो ऽपि ह्य् अनेन प्रकारेण संयाव एव । **वृथा**शब्दः सर्वत्रानुषज्यते । यद् आत्मार्थं क्रियते, न देवपित्रतिथ्यर्थम् । तदा कृसरादीनाम् उपदेश इति । 


[^११]:
     M G: mudgamakuṣṭha-

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u>[^१२] । न हि गृहस्था एकेनार्थेन[^१३] पचन्ति[^१४] । हविष इवावापात् प्रभृति तादर्थ्येनोद्देशः ।[^१५] किं तर्हि अनुद्दिष्टविशेषस्य सामान्यतः कृतस्यान्नस्य पञ्चयज्ञानुष्ठानं विहितम् । तत्राकृतवैश्वदेवस्य भोजने विहितातिक्रमः, न पुनः प्रतिषेधः समस्ति । तथा हि द्वे प्रायश्चित्ते भवतः । विहितातिक्रमात् प्रतिषिद्धसेवनाच् च । कृसरादयस् तु देवताविसेषं वास्तुयज्ञादिविषयम् अनुद्दिश्य कृताश् चेद्[^१६] आह्निकविधयो ऽपि प्रतिषिध्यन्ते । 


[^१६]:
     M G: kṛtākṛtatvād 


[^१५]:
     M G add here: atra hi kasya pākaḥ syāt


[^१४]:
     M G 1st ed.: paṭhanti


[^१३]:
     M G 1st ed.: kenārthataḥ


[^१२]:
     M G 1st ed: tad uktam; G 2nd ed: tad ity uktam

- यश् चापि "नात्मार्थं पचेत्" इति सो ऽप्य् अवश्यकर्तव्यत्वात् कृतातिक्रमस्य[^१७] भोजनप्राप्त्यनुवादो न पुनः प्रतिषेधः । तथा सति द्विमूलकल्पनाप्रायश्चित्तं स्याद् इत्य् उक्तम् । न चान्यार्थत्वेनापि कृतस्यात्मार्थता पाकस्य निषेद्धुं शक्यते । पच्यमानार्थो हि पाकस् तस्य तद्द्वारिका न शक्या आत्मार्थता निषेद्धुम्, तेनैव वृत्तिविधानात् । न हि भृत्यादिशिष्टभोजनं[^१८] गृहस्थस्य शेषसंस्कारो न चात्र संकल्पः श्रुतो येन मदर्थं पच्यताम् इति पाककाले संकल्पमात्रं निषिध्यते । आत्मार्थं चोत्तरकालम् अविचार्येत्य् उच्यते । मिथ्यासंकल्पदोषश् च स्यात् । देवतार्थतया संकल्पितस्यात्मार्थतया योग इति । तस्माद् अयम् अनुवादो यत् पचेन् नात्मार्थम् एवोपयोज्यं प्राग् विधेर् वैश्वदेविकाद् इति । तथा च अपक्वभोजने ऽपि विधिम् एतं स्मरन्ति । "यदन्नः पुरुषो राजंस् तदन्नास् तस्य देवताः" (राम् २.९५.३१) इति । न च बुभुक्षमाणस्यैवाधिकारः, गार्हस्थ्यप्रतिपत्तिनिमित्तत्वात् । तेन यद् अहर् न भुञ्जीत तद् अहर् अप्य् अकुर्वन् प्रत्यवैति । 


[^१८]:
     M G: vṛtyādi-


[^१७]:
     M G 1st ed.: kṛtākramasya

- एतद् उक्तं भवति । स्वार्थं वा पचतु परार्थं[^१९] वा पाक्षीद् इति सर्वथा कृतवैश्वदेवातिक्रमणव्रता अपि न प्रवर्तन्ते इति नित्यताम् अनुवदति । यच् चापि पठति । 


[^१९]:
     M G: padārthaṃ

- लौकिके वैदिके वापि हुतोत्सृष्टे जले क्षितौ ।

- वैस्वदेवस् तु कर्तव्यः पञ्चसूनापनुत्तये ॥ इति ।

अनेनापि नित्यतैवोच्यते । न हि वैदिके वैश्वदेवसंभवः । न च स्मार्तवचने प्रमाणम् अस्ति । 

- **पायसापूपम्** इति । पयसा सिद्ध ओदनः **पायस्ः**, न दध्यादिपयोविकारः । **अपूपाः** पुरोडाशाः । **देवान्नानि** समाचारप्रमाणकानि । **हवींषि** श्रुतिविहितानि होतव्यानि — प्राग् ग्रहहोमाद् — यतो हविःशेषस्य भक्ष्यतां वक्ष्यति । **अनुपाकृतस्य** अयज्ञातस्य[^२०] पशोर् **मांसानि** । उपाकरणं पशोः संस्कारविशेषः । स पशुयागेषु विहितः । एतेन च यज्ञोपयुक्तशेषभक्ष्यता मांसस्य लक्ष्यते । **वृथा**शब्दाधिकारे ऽप्य् **अनुपाकृत**ग्रहणम् अतिथ्यादिशिष्टस्यापि गोऽव्यजमांसस्य प्रतिषेधार्थम् । गोऽव्यजमांसम् एव वानुपाकृतशब्देन विवक्षितम् । गोऽव्यजस्यैव तत्रालम्भश् चोदितो यतः शिष्टं प्रोक्षितम् इत्य् उक्तम्[^२१] ॥ ५.७ ॥


[^२१]:
     M G 1st ed.: śiṣṭaṃ proktam


[^२०]:
     M G 1st ed.: ayajñe hutasya
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Kṛsarasaṃyāran*’ is an aggregative copulative compound. Rice cooked
with Sesamum is called ‘*kṛsara*’;—‘*saṃyāva*’ is a particular article
of food, made up of butter, sugar, sesamum and such things, well-known
in cities.

Some people, on the strength of the root ‘*yu*’ (from which the term
‘*saṃyāva*’ is derived) signifying the act of *mixing*, explain the term
‘*saṃyāva*’ as standing for all those articles of food that are prepared
by-mixing together different kinds of grains,—such as the *mudga*, the
*kuṣṭhaka* and the rest.

For these persons the separate mention of ‘*kṛsara*’ would be
superfluous; as this would be included under ‘*saṃyāva*’, as just
explained.

The term ‘*needlessly cooked*’ is to be construed with all the terms. It
stands for what the householder cooks for himself, and not for the sake
of Gods, Pitṛs or guests.

This however does not appear to be right. Because the ordinary cooking
chat the Householder Hoes is not always for any such set purpose as that
of inn king offerings out of it. What happens is that the cooking having
been done, without reference to any particular purpose, and only in a
general way, the Five Sacrifices have been laid down, as to be offered
out of the food thus cooked. So that if the man eats the food without
having made the offering to the Viśvedevas out of it, he transgresses a
direct injunction; but no prohibition enters into the cuse. According to
the present text however, as just explained, such eating would
necessitate two expiatory rites,—one due to transgressing an injunction
(by not making the offering to the Viśvedevas), and another due to the
doing of a prohibited act (of cooking the Rice-sesamum needlessly). If
however such articles of food as ‘Rice-sesamum’ and the rest, are cooked
without reference to a particular God, or to a particular sacrificial
rite,—this involves a transgression of the rules pertaining to one’s
daily duties also.

As regards the text ‘one shall not cook for himself’,—this cannot be
regarded as a prohibition (; because it being absolutely necessary to Ho
the cooking, all that the sentence does is simply to make a reference to
the *act of eating* done by one who has disobeyed the rules (regarding
the daily ‘sacrifices’). For, as already pointed out above, if it were a
prohibition, there would be a twofold expiatory rite involved. Then
again, even when the cooking is done for some other purpose, it cannot
be absolutely denied that it has been done by the man ‘for himself’
also. ‘Cooking’ means the act of cooking food, and the fact of its being
done for one’s own self cannot be denied by means of the same word; as
the man is directed to live upon the same food (*i.e*., what is left
after the feeding of the guests &c). The eating of the remnant, of food,
after the guests and others have been fed, (which has been laid down for
the Householder) is not meant to be a mere ‘embellishment’ of the
Remnant (and not an act necessary for the maintenance of the man
himself). Nor has it been laid down anywhere that at the time of cooking
the Householder is to make use of any such formula of determination as
‘cook food *for me*’, which would be regarded as forbidden (by the
sentence ‘one shall not cook for himself’) In fact the cooking is said
to be ‘for himself’ only in consideration of what happens subsequently.
That is to say, if the food were cooked wjth the determination to make
an offering to the Gods, and then subsequently the man were to eat it
all himself, this would involve the wrong of being false to one’s own
resolve also. From all this it is clear that the sentence in question is
a mere reiterative reference, the sense being—‘what one cooks, he should
not use for himself until he has made the offering to the *Viśvedevas*’.

It is in view of all this that this same rule has been held to be
applicable also to the case of the man eating *uncooked* food; in
accordance with the assertion—‘the Gods of a man have the same food as
the man himselt’ (*Vālmīkīya Rāmāyaṇa*.)

Further, cooking is not to be done only by the hungry householder; in
fact, the act of cooking every day forms an integral factor of
*Householder ship* itself. So that even on the day on which the man
himself does not eat, if he omits the act of cooking, he incurs sin.

The upshot of the whole is this:—The man may cook for himself, or for
others; the words ‘shall not cook for himself’ can only mean that people
should not undertake the act, if they do not intend to make the offering
to the Viśvedevas. So that this only reiterates the obligatory character
of the offering. Similarly also the text that—‘For the removal of the
sin of the Five Slaughters, the Viśvedeva-offering shall be made in the
ordinary fire, in the Vedic sacrificial fire, in the fire in which
oblations have been already poured and the deity dismissed, in water or
on the ground, only reiterates the obligatory character of the offering
to the *Viśvedevas*. Because the said offering cannot be made into the
Vedic sacrificial fire; specially as there is no authority attaching to
a *Smṛti* text (as against a *Śruti* text) \[so that the text just
quoted cannot be taken in its literal sense\].

‘*Milk-rice and flour-cakes*’.—‘*Pāyasa*’, ‘*Milk-rice*,’ stands for
rice cooked in milk, and not for preparations of milk;—‘*Puroḍāśa* (?)’
is flour-cake.

‘*Food of the Gods*’:—what these are can only be ascertained from usage.

‘*Sacrificial viands*—the materials laid down in the *Śruti* as to be
offered into the Fire.

These are ‘unlit to be eaten only before the *Grahahomas*; as the text
is going to lay down the necessity of eating the remnants of the
offerings.

The meat of an animal that has not been ‘consecrated,’—*i.e*. which has
not been killed at a sacrifice.^(‘)Consecration’ is a peculiar form of
purification of the animal, prescribed in connection with the
‘Animal-Sacrifice.’ The mention of this indicates that one should eat
the remnant of the meat that has been offered at a sacrifice.

Though the Text has already used the qualification ‘*needlessly
prepared*’, yet the epithet ‘*unconsecrated*’ has been added with a view
to forbid the merit of the cow, the sheep and the goa (goat?) that may
have been left by the guest and other persons to whom they may have been
offered. Or, the term *unconsecrated* may be taken as refering specially
to the meat of the cow, the sheep and the goat; since it is the killing
of these animals only that has been enjoined in connection with
sacrifices; the other animals being described as already ‘*prokṣita*’,
‘washed clean’ (fit for cating).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. The Mahābhārata 13.104.41.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 448), which explains ‘*vṛthā*’
as ‘what is cooked for oneself, and not for being offered to gods or
pitṛs’,—and quotes the *Chandogapariśiṣṭa* as defining ‘*kṛsara*’ to be
‘rice and sesamum cooked together,’—‘*saṃyāva*’ is a preparation of
‘butter, milk, molasses, and the flour of wheat and other
grains,’—‘*anupākṛtomāṃsa*’ is ‘meat not consecrated by
*mantras*,’—‘*devānna*’ is ‘food prepared for offering to
gods,’—‘*haviṣ*’ is the ‘sacrificial cake’ and such things;—and in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 610.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.31).—‘Flesh of animals with teeth not fallen out, flesh of
diseased animals, and flesh got without any religious purpose.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.37).—‘Śālūka, needlessly cooked rice-sesamum and butter,
sugar-wheat, rice-milk, cakes, breads fried in butter, food of the gods
and sacrificial viands.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.171, 173).—‘Offerings meant for gods... unconsecrated
meat, rice-sesamum or butter-sugar-wheat, or milk-rice or flour-cakes or
wheaten bread fried in butter,—needlessly cooked.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	Rice boiled with sesamum, wheat mixed with butter, milk and sugar, milk-rice and flour-cakes which are not prepared for a sacrifice, meat which has not been sprinkled with water while sacred texts were recited, food offered to the gods and sacrificial viands,
</details>
