+++
title = "008 अनिर्दशाया गोः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The milk of the cow that has not passed its ten days, as also that of the camel and of one-hoofed animals and of sheep; the milk of the irregular cow, as also the milk of the cow without her calf.—(8)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यदीह "अनिर्दशाहं गोः क्षीरम्" इति पाठः उष्ट्रादीनाम् अपि दाशाहादिकः प्रतिषेध आशङ्क्यते । अनिर्दशाग्रहणानुवृत्त्या तत्र समाचार आत्यन्तिकप्रतिषेधार्थ आश्रयणीयः । अनिर्दशाया इति तु स्त्रीलिङ्गपाठे आशङ्कैव नास्ति । न हि तद्धितान्तैर् अनिर्दशाया उष्ट्रम् इत्यादिभिः संबन्धोपत्तिः । उत्तरत्र च पुनः क्षीरग्रहणात् समाचाराच् च उष्ट्रैकशफाविकानिर्दशगवीक्षीराणि सविकाराणि प्रतिषिध्यन्ते । संधिनीविवत्सयोस् तु क्षीरम् एव । 

- **अनिर्दशा** च गौर् उच्यते यस्याः प्रसूताया दशाहान्य् अनतिक्रान्तानि । **संधिनी** या उभयोः प्राप्तदोहा कथंचिद् अन्यतरस्मिन् दुह्यते । प्रातरदुग्धा[^२२] सायं  दुह्यते । सा तु स्वल्पक्षीरत्वाद् एकस्मिन्न् एव काले, सासौ **संधिनी** । 


[^२२]:
     M G 1st ed.: sāyam apradugdhā; G 2nd ed.: prātar adugdhā sāyam apradugdhā

- <u>कश्चिद्</u> आह या मृतस्ववत्सा परकीयं वत्सं संचार्य दुह्यते सा **संधिनी** । **विवत्सा** तु या सत्य् एव वत्से विनाकृतवत्सा वत्सप्रस्रवणम् अनपेक्ष्य कुष्ठकयवशालितुषादिना भोजनविशेषेण दुह्यात् । 

- **विवत्साया** इति । तेनैव वत्सग्रहणेनावत्सा धेनुर् आनीयताम् इतिवद् गोर् इति लब्धे गोग्रहणम् अजामहिष्योर् अप्रतिषेधार्थम् । न पुनर् अनिर्दशाया इत्य् अत्र । अतश् च गोग्रहणं तत्राजाद्युपलक्षणार्थम् । तथा च गौतमः- "गोश् च क्षीरम् अनिर्दशायाह् सूतके । अजामहिष्योश् च " (ग्ध् १७.२२–२३) इत्य् आह । **पयो**ग्रहणं संधिनीक्षीरम् इति समासान्तवर्तिनः क्षीरपदस्य नातिसुकरः संबन्धो यतः ॥ ५.८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If we read the opening words as ‘*anirdaśāham goḥ kṣīram*,’ then the
prohibition regarding the milk of the camel and other animals also would
be understood as limited to the ten days from calving; so that the
qualification ‘that has not passed its ten days’ being taken with every
one of the animals, it would become necessary to depend entirely upon
usage in support of the absolute prohibition of the milk of the camel
and other animals. If however we rend ‘*anirdaśāyāḥ*’ in the feminine
form, then there would be no possibility of the above misunderstanding.
Because it would not be possible to interpret the nominal affixes
(attached to filenames of the other animals) as, in any way, connecting
these animals with the epithet ‘*anirdaśāyāḥ*’)

In as much as the word ‘milk’ is repeated in the second half of the
verse, this implies that what are forbidden by the former half are the
milk of the camel, of the one-hoofed animals, of the sheep, of the goat
and of the cow within ten days of its calving,—along with all its
preparations; while in the case of the ‘irregular’ cow and the cow
‘deprived of its calf’, it is the *milk* only that is forbidden. Such is
the usage also.

That cow is called ‘*anirdaśāha*,’ ‘not passed its ten days’, in whose
case ten days have not passed since her calving.

‘*Irregular cow*’;—the cow that is expected to give milk both morning
and evening, but gives it only at one time; giving milk in the evening
only if not milked in the morning; and on account of the supply of milk
being scanty, she is milked once only.

Some people explain ‘*Sandhini*’ as standing for that cow which, on
having lost her own calf, is made to yield milk by bringing to her the
calf of another cow; and in this case the cow ‘*without her calf*’ would
be one whose calf is alive, but is separated from it, and is milked,
independently of the calf, through presenting before her such special
articles of food as the husks of barley, rice etc., so that the cow
would be called ‘without her calf’ by the calf being held aside; just as
people say—‘bring the cow without her calf’.

The ‘cow’ having been already mentioned in the first half, the term is
repeated in the second half, with a view to show that similar milk of
the goat and the buffalo is not forbidden. The same does not hold good
regarding the epithet ‘*anirdaśāyāh*,’ ‘that has not passed its ten
days;’ so that in this connection the ‘cow’ includes the front and the
buffalo also. So says Gautama (17.22-23)—‘The milk of the cow that has
not passed its ten days, during the period of impurity; also of the goat
and the buffalo.’

The term ‘*payaḥ*’ ‘milk,’ has been added because it is not easy to
construe the term ‘of the cow,’ with the term ‘*kṣīram*,’ ‘milk’ as
contained in the compound ‘*sandhinīkṣīram*.’—(8)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sandhinī*’—‘a cow that gives milk only once a day’ (Medhātithi, and
Govindarāja);—‘a cow in heat’ (Kullūka, who quotes Hārita in support,
Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda);—‘a cow big with calf’ (Nandana);—‘a cow
whose own calf being dead, is milked with the help of another’s calf’
(‘some one’ mentioned in Medhātithi.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290), where it is said that
the unintentional drinking of these milks, if done once only, makes one
liable to the penance of a single day’s fast, while if done
intentionally, or if repeated, it entails a three days’ fast.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 712), where the
‘*Sandhinī*’ is described as ‘the cow that approaches the bull *i.e*.,
the cow in heat’,—and the ‘*anirdaśā*’ as ‘the one that has not passed
more than ten days since delivery.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 448), which adds the
following:—‘*anirdaśā*’ is that which has not passed ten days since its
delivery;—the ‘cow’ stands for the goat and the buffallo
also;—‘*ekaśapha*’ are the horse and other one-hoofed animals;—the
‘*sandhinī*’ is the cow that seeks for the bull; the avoiding of the
second ‘*goḥ*’ in the second line indicates that it is the milk of the
*cow* only that has lost its calf, and not that of the goat or the
buffalo.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 525), which adds the
following:—‘*nirdaśā*’ is the cow that has passed ten days since
delivery;—‘*ekaśapha*’ are the horse and other one-hoofed
animals—‘*āvika*’ is ‘the milk of the ewe’;—‘*sandhinī*’ is the cow in
heat;—‘*vivatsā*’ is one devoid of her calf.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 929), which contains the same
remarks as *Mitākṣarā*;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha p. 13a)—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 567);—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 328), which explains
‘*ekaśapha*’ as standing for the Horse and the like, and ‘*Sandhinī*’ as
the cow ‘which has been covered by the bull’;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 335).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.22-26).—‘The milk of the cow until ten days have elapsed
since its calving, which is its period of impurity;—also of the she-goat
and the she-buffalo;—the milk of sheep and of the camel is never to be
drunk, as also that of one-hoofed animals; also the milk of the cow that
is constantly dripping milk, or which gives birth to twins or of the
irregular cow; also of the cow that has lost its calf.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.9-11).—‘The milk of an animal until its calf is ten
days old, and of one that gives milk while pregnant should not be
drunk;—nor that of a cow which has no calf, or which is milked with a
strange calf; the milk of sheep, camels or one-hoofed animals.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.22-24).—‘The milk of sheep,—also the milk of the
camel, the deer, the milk of the irregular cow and of the cow that gives
birth to twins,—also of the cow within ten days of its calving.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.34-85).—‘Let him not drink the milk of the cow in heat,
nor of one whose calf has died;—nor that given by cows, buffalos and
goats within ten days of calving.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.28-40).—‘All milks, except that of the cow, the goat and the
buffalo;—the milk of even these within ten days of calving;—also the
milk of those which are irregular in milk, or which constantly drip
milk, or which has lost its calf.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.170).—‘Milk of the cow in heat, of the cow within ten
days of its calving, of the cow that has lost its calf,—one should
avoid; also the milk of camels, of one-hoofed animals, of women, of wild
animals and of sheep.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 216).—‘The milk of all animals with two teats
should be avoided, except that of the goat.’

*Āpastamba* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 712).—‘The well-behaved Kṣatriya, or
Vaiśya or Śūdra should not drink the milk of the Kapilā cow.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, pp. 525, 526).—‘One shall not drink the
milk of the cow in heat;—nor of the cow whose calf is absent or dead, of
the cow that has been milked dry, nor of one just calved, till seven
days have elapsed, according to some,—ten days, according to
others,—while according to some, milk becomes drinkable after a
month;—they say that for two months, all the milk should he given to the
calf; during the third month, one shall milk only two teats, during the
fourth three teats.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

008	The milk of a cow (or other female animal) within ten days after her calving, that of camels, of one-hoofed animals, of sheep, of a cow in heat, or of one that has no calf with her,
</details>
