+++
title = "010 दधि भक्ष्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among Soured Substances, the curd is fit to be eaten, and all that is prepared out of it; as also all that is distilled from pure flowers, roots and fruits;—(10)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अविशेषेण सर्वशुक्तेषु प्रतिषिद्धेषु केषुचिद् अयम् अपवादः[^२३] । शुक्तान्य् उच्यन्ते यानि प्राप्तसारस्यानि[^२४] कालात्ययेन द्रव्यान्तरसंसर्गेण वाम्लताम् अपद्यन्ते । यथाम्रातकादीनि मधुराणि चिरकालम् अतिरसत्वाच् छुक्तानि भवन्ति । निष्पीडितो मधुररसः कालतो ऽम्लताम् एतीत्यादिना एवंविधानि ।[^२५] यानि तु स्वभावतो ऽम्लानि दाडिमामलकजम्बीरादीनि तानि नैव शुक्तानि । यानि च प्राप्तकालोत्पत्त्यादीनि । न ह्य् अयम् आम्लपर्यायः शुक्तशब्दः । तत्र केवलानि पाकतः शुक्तानि प्रतिषिध्यन्ते । द्रव्यान्तरैश् च पुष्पमूलकादिभिर् योजितान्य् अत्र ज्ञायन्ते । तथा च गौतमः- "शुक्तं केवलम् अदधि" (ग्ध् १७.१४ ) ।


[^२५]:
     M G 1st ed add: tu


[^२४]:
     M G 1st ed.: prāptasvarasāvasthāni; G 2nd ed: prāptasvārasyāni


[^२३]:
     M G: arthavādaḥ

- **अभिषूयन्ते** । अभिषव उदकेन संसृज्य परिवासनम् । 

- <u>यद्य् एवं</u> काल एव तर्ह्य् अम्लताहेतुः । 

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । एतान्य् अपि द्रव्याणि । तृतीया च करणे सहयोगे वा । पुष्पादिभिर् उदकेन सह अभिषूयन्ते संधीयन्ते ।

- <u>केचित्</u> त्व् आहुः । यत्र पुष्पमूलाण्य् अम्लताम् जनयन्ति । यानि दाडिमामलकादीनि शुक्तानि तानि भक्ष्याणि, यानि द्राक्षादिभिर् मधुरैर् अभिषूयन्ते संधीयन्ते तानि न भक्ष्यन्ते । अभिषवो ह्य् उच्यते शुक्तताजननम् । यानि पुष्पादिभिः शुक्तीक्रियन्ते । न च द्राक्षादीनि शुक्ततापादकानि । किं तर्हि केवल एव कालः । 

- <u>एतत्</u> तु न सम्यक्, अशब्दार्थत्वात् । न हि सोमम् अभिषुणोतीति शुक्तं करोतीति प्रतिपत्तिः । किं तर्हि य एव प्राग् व्याख्यातो ऽर्थः । 

- **दधिसंभवम्** उदश्विन्मस्तुकिलाटकूर्चिकादि ॥ ५.१० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

All ‘soured substances’ having been forbidden in the foregoing verse,
the present: text makes an exception in favour of a few of them.

‘*Śukta*’, ‘soured substance’, is the name of those substances which,
being juicy in their constitution and having a distinct taste of their
own, become *soured* either by the flux of time, or by the contact of
some other substance. For instance, the *Āmrātaka*, which is sweet and
full of juice, becomes^(‘)soured’ after the lapse of some time;
cane-juice becomes ‘soured’ after sometime. Things that are sour by
their very nature—*e*. *g*., the Pomegranate, the Āmalaka, the Lemon
&c.—are not called^(‘)soured substances’; nor those that are still
*unripe*. Because the term^(‘)*śukta*’,^(‘)soured’, is not synonymous
with^(‘)sour’. What are directly forbidden here are only those soured
substances that have become sour by fermentation; and those that turn
sour by the contact of flowers and roots &c. are only indirectly
indicated; according to what Gautama has said (17.14)—^(‘)All soured
substances except Curd only’.

^(‘)*Distilled*’.—Distillation consists in allowing the thing to remain
soaked in water over-night.

“In that case the sourness would be due to the length of time (so that
all these would be included among^(‘)Soured Substances’).”

True; these also are ‘soured substances’; and the Instrumental ending
may signify either *instrumentality* or *association*. The meaning thus
is—‘what are *distilled*—*e.g*. made out of—flowers etc. along with
water’.

Some people offer the fallowing explanation:—“The roots of trees are
directly productive of *sourness*. Such ‘sour substances’ as the
Pomegranate, the *Āmalaka* and the rest are ‘fit to be eaten’, while
those that are distilled from grapes and other sweet things are not
eaten. ‘Distillation’ means *producing acidity*; hence ‘*distilled from
flowers*’ means soured by flowers and such things. Grapes and such other
things however are not themselves productive of acidity; in their case
it is *time* alone that is the acidulating agent.”

This however i not right; simply because such is not the meaning of the
term (‘distillation’). When one says ‘he is *distilling* Soma’—this is
not understood to mean that he is *making it sour*; what is understood
is as we have explained above.

‘*Prepared out of curd*’;—*e.g. Udaśvit*, *Maṣṭu* (whey), *Kilāṭa*
(Coagulated milk), *Kūrcika* (Inspissated milk) and so forth.—(10)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
448), which explains ‘*dadhisambhavam*’ as standing for the *takra* and
other similar preparations;—and again on p. 182;—and in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 616).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.14).—(See above.)

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.14).—‘Stale food should not be eaten, except
pot-herbs, broths, meat, clarified butter, cooked grain, molasses, curds
and barley-meal.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.19).—‘Excepting raw sugar, fried grain, curd-rice,
fried barley, barley-meal, vegetables, meat, wheat-cake, preparations of
milk, herbs, tree-roots and fruits (stale food shall not be eaten).’

*Viṣṇu* (51.42).—(See above.)

*Yājñavalkya* (1.169).—‘Food cooked overnight may be eaten, if it is
smeared with fatty oils, or if it has been kept for a long time;
preparations of wheat, barley and milk may be eaten even when not mixed
with fatty oils.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, 7.245).—‘Soured foods one should Dover eat; but in
times of distress they may be eaten after being washed; preparations of
lentil and māṣa, even though cooked overnight, one may eat after washing
them and mixing butter with them. Even though one may avoid soured
substances, one may eat such things cooked overnight as wheat-cakes,
rice-curd, fried grains, small cakes, barley-meal, vegetables, meat,
broths, rice-gruel, barley-flour and things mixed with fatty oils. Curds
and food mixed with molasses, when stale, should be avoided; so also
drinks prepared with honey and butter.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Even though soured, curd may be eaten, also
preparations of curd; drinks made of fruits and roots and flowers may be
eaten, if they are not intoxicating.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

010	Among (things turned) sour, sour milk, and all (food) prepared of it may be eaten, likewise what is extracted from pure flowers, roots, and fruit.
</details>
