+++
title = "011 क्रव्यादाञ् शकुनान्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall avoid all carnivorous birds, and also those living in villages, the one-hoofed animals not specified, and also the Ṭiṭṭibha.—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**क्रव्याद** आममांसभक्षकाः कङ्कगृध्रादयः । अभक्ष्यवत् केवलाममांसभक्षका गृह्यन्ते । न तूभयरक्ता[^२६] मयूरादयः । **ग्रामनिवासिनः** अक्रव्यादा अपि । **एकशफा** अश्वाश्वतरगर्दभादयः । **अनिर्दिष्टास्** तु न भक्ष्यत्वेनोक्तास्[^२७] ते न भक्ष्या इति । ये तूक्तास् तत्रैव भक्ष्याः । ये तूष्ट्रवडवऋक्षगौरगर्दभाः[^२८] प्रजाकामस् तेषां च मांसम् अश्नीयाद् इति ।


[^२८]:
     M G 1st ed.: tvāṣṭra-


[^२७]:
     M G 1st ed: nābhakṣya-


[^२६]:
     M G: tatrobhayaraktā

- <u>ननु</u> च श्रुतित एव तत्र भक्ष्यावाप्तिः । प्रत्युत निर्दिष्टग्रहणे सति श्रुतौ चोदितानाम् अन्यत्र भक्ष्याशङ्का, अनिदिष्टान् वर्जयेन् न निर्दिष्टान् इति वाक्यार्थप्रतिपत्तेः । न च स्मृतौ केचिद् भक्ष्यत्वेन निर्दिष्टाः, येन तद्व्यतिरिक्तविषयम् अनिर्दिष्टग्रहणं व्याख्यायेत । अतः श्रुतौ ये निर्दिष्टास् ते न भक्ष्या इति प्राप्नोति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । आचाराविरोधी स स्मृत्यर्थः । अनिर्दिष्टग्रहणम् अनुवादः । 

- **टिट्टिभः** शकुनिर् एव, टिटीति यो वाशते । प्रायेण शब्दानुकरणनिमित्तं शकुनीनां नामधेयप्रतिलम्भः । तदुक्तं निरुक्तकारेण- "काक इति शब्दानुकृतिस् तद् इदं शकुनिषु बहुलम्" (निर् ३.१८) इति ॥ ५.११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Carnivorous*’;—those that eat raw flesh; such as the Heron, the
Vulture &c. What are meant are those that eat *raw flesh* only; and not
those that eat both (raw and cooked flesh), such as the Peacock and the
rest.

‘*Living in villages*’—even though they be not carnivorous.

‘*One-hoofed animals*;’—*e.g*., the Horse, the Mule, the Ass and so
forth.

‘*Not specified*’;—*i.e*. those that have not been specified as *fit to
be eaten* should not be eaten: those that have been so specified are lit
to be eaten. For instance, it has been declared that ‘one who desires to
obtain offspring shall eat the meat of the camel, the horse, the bear
and the white ass’. \[and here the one-hoofed animals, horse and white
ass, are specified as fit to be eaten\].

“The eatability of these animals is known only from this *Śruti*
passage. And the presence of the term ‘specified’ in the verse would he
understood to mean that the animals thus specified in the Vedic passage
may be eaten even elsewhere (apart from Vedic sacrifices also); the
meaning of the text being ‘one shall avoid those *nut specified*, but
not *those specified*.’ As a matter of fact however, nowhere in the
*Smṛti* have any one-hoofed animals been *specified* as fit to be eaten,
with reference to which the term ‘not specified’ (of the text) could be
explained. Hence it comes to this that ‘those not specified *in the
śruti* are unfit to be eaten”.’

Our answer to the above is that such a sense of the Smṛti would be
contrary to all usage. The term ‘not specified’ is a mere re-iterative
reference.

‘*Ṭiṭṭibha*’—is a bird which is always screaming ‘ṭiṭ’, ‘ṭiṭ’. In most
cases the names of birds are in imitation of their sounds: as says the
*Nirukta*—‘The name *Kāka* is in imitation of the sound; such is the
case with most bird-names.’—(11).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika p. 540), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kravyādaḥ*’ are the vulture and other birds that eat
raw flesh only, and also the peacock and others that eat both raw and
cooked flesh;—‘*grāmanivāsinaḥ*’ stands for such village-birds as the
pigeon and the like, which do not eat flesh;—the term *Śakunīn* is to be
construed with both ‘*kravyādaḥ*’ and ‘*grāmanivāsinaḥ*’;—*ekaśapha*’
are the horse and other one-hoofed animals,—‘*anirdiṣṭaḥ*’ means ‘those
that are not mentioned in the *Śruti* as fit for eating’; those that are
mentioned as such should certainly be eaten; this refers to such
sacrificial animals as are mentioned in the Vedic texts like the
following:—‘One should sacrifice the horse to Tvaṣṭṛ’; which implies
that the flesh of the horse so sacrificed must be eaten;—‘*Ṭiṭṭibha*’ is
the name of the bird that makes the ‘*ṭī ṭī*’ sound.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 582);—and in *Smṛtisāroddhārā*
(p. 298).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautamā* (17.28-29)—‘Animals with two rows of teeth, hair-covered
animals, hairless animals, one-hoofed animals, house-sparrow,
*Cakravāka* and *Haṃsa*;—also crows, herons, vultures, kites, such
water-fowls as have red feet or beaks, village-hens and village hogs.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.1-2).—‘Tame animals should not be eaten; nor
carnivorous and tame birds.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.29, 34).—‘One-hoofed animals, camels, *gavaya*,
village-hog, *śarabha* and cows;—also carnivorous animals (are not to be
eaten).

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.48).—‘Among birds, those who seek food by scratching with
feet, the web-footed ones, the *Kalaviṅka*, the water-hen, the
flamingo... a vulture,... those feeding on flesh and those living about
villages,’

*Viṣṇu* (51.28-30).—‘On eating the flesh of carnivorous animals and
birds one should perform the *Tapta-Kṛcchra*; on eating the
*Kalaviṅka*... one should fast for three nights;—also on eating
one-footed animals and those with two rows of teeth.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.172).—‘Carnivorous birds... one-hoofed animals, animals
living about villages, etc., etc.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 248).—‘Cow, sheep, goat, horse, mule, ass and
man—these seven are the *gramya-paśus* (*grāmya-paśus*?), animals living
about villages.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘They eat animals of the village and of the forest,
sheep, goat, buffalo, deer, rhinoceros, etc., etc.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 541).—‘Cranes, flamingoes, owls,
crows, vultures, cocks, pigeons are birds that should not be eaten.’

*Yama* (Do, pp. 542 and 543).—‘Mushrooms. village-hogs, web-footed
birds,—by eating these the twice-born becomes degraded; also by eating
cows, horses, asses, camels, dogs, jackals, scratching birds, and
pecking birds.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘Among scratching birds, the cock should not he
eaten; among pecking birds, the Plava; also carnivorous birds and the
flamingo, the Bhāsa, etc., etc.’

*Parāśara* (2.11).—‘On intentionally eating the flesh of the frog or the
mouse, the twice-born becomes purified by living on barley-meal for one
day.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

011	Let him avoid all carnivorous birds and those living in villages, and one-hoofed animals which are not specially permitted (to be eaten), and the Tittibha (Parra Jacana),
</details>
