+++
title = "012 कलविङ्कम् प्लवम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Sparrow, the Plava, the Haṃsa, the Cakravāka; the village-cock, the Crane, the Rajjudāla, the Dātyūha, the Parrot and the Starling.—(12).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कलविङ्को** ग्रामचटको निगमेषूक्तः । ग्रामवासित्वात् तस्य सिद्धे प्रतिषेधे पुनः प्रतिषेधः स्त्रियाश् चटकाया अब्यनुज्ञानार्थः । पुंशब्दो ह्य् अयं वृषबवत् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आरण्यस्य निवृत्त्यर्थं मन्यन्ते । ते हि वर्षासु वनवासिनो भवन्ति । बाहुलयव्यपदेशाच् च ग्रामचटका उच्यन्ते । यथा महिषा आरण्याः । 

- **प्लवहंसचक्रवाकानां** वक्ष्यमाणजालपादप्रतिषेधात् सिद्धे प्रतिषेधे नित्यार्थं ग्रहणम् । अत आट्यादीनां विकल्पेन भक्षणं गम्यते । **ग्रामकुक्कुटम्** । ग्रामग्रहणाद् आरण्याभ्यनुज्ञानम् । 

- <u>कुतः</u> पुनर् आरण्यस्याभक्ष्यताशङ्का ।

- <u>स्मृत्यन्तरे हि</u> "कुक्कुटो विकिराणाम्" (आप्ध् १.१७.३२) इति पठ्यते । अतश् चाविशेषेणाभक्ष्यता प्राप्ता, वचनेन तस्य सामान्यप्रतिषेधस्य विशिष्टविषयता प्रज्ञायते ।

- <u>ननु</u> विकल्पः कस्मान् न भवत्य्[^२९] अनेन शास्त्रेणास्याभ्यनुज्ञानाच् छास्त्रान्तरेण चाविशेषेण तस्यापि प्रतिषेधात् । 


[^२९]:
     M G: kasmād bhavaty

- <u>नायं</u> विकल्पस्य विषयः । विरोधे हि तुल्यबलानां विकल्पो न चात्र विरोधो ऽस्ति । न ह्य् अनयोः स्मृत्योः शास्त्रभेदो ऽपि, सामान्यस्य विशेष उपसंहर्तुं न्याय्यत्वात्, शाखान्तरतस् तृतीयस्याप्य् एकशास्त्रस्य दर्शितत्वात् । 

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं जालपादप्रतिषेधस्यापि हंसादिविशेष एवोपसंहारो युक्तो नाविशेषेण काकजालपादानां सर्वेषां प्रतिषेधः । 

- <u>भवेद् एवं</u> यद्य् अपौरुषेयो ऽयं ग्रन्थः स्यात् । भिन्नकर्तृके त्व् अपौरुषेयत्वे न सामान्यस्य[^३०] किंचित् प्रयोजनं हंसादिविशेषमात्रपर्यवसाने । भिन्नकर्तृकत्वे तु[^३१] पौरुषेयत्वे सति सामान्यदर्शिनो विशेषविषयम् अज्ञानं संभवति, विशेषदर्शिनो ऽपि सामान्यविषयम्[^३२] । उभयोश् च मूलकल्पनायाम् एकस्य सामान्यवेदनं वचनमूलं कल्प्यते, अन्यस्य विशेषवचनम् । तयोश् च वैदिकयोर् भिन्नशाखादीतयोर् असति शास्त्रभेदे, एकवाक्यतैव न्याय्या । न च वेदे पर्यनुयोगो ऽस्ति, किं सामान्येन यदि विशेषनिष्ठता, तस्य कर्तुर् अभावात् । श्रुताद् धि तत्र प्रतिपत्तिः केवलशब्दशक्तिसमाश्रिता । न प्रयोजनवशेनार्थान्तरकल्पनम् । 


[^३२]:
     M G 1st ed.: -viṣayaḥ


[^३१]:
     M G: bhinnakartṛkaś ca


[^३०]:
     M G add: na

( **रज्जुदाला**दयः शाकुनिकेभ्य उपलब्धव्याः ॥ ५.१२ ॥)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sparrow*’, ‘*Kalabiṅka*’ (‘*Kalaviṅka*’), is the name of a
village-bird described in the scriptures. Its prohibition being already
got at by the general prohibition of all ‘village-birds’, the separate
mention of the sparrow implies the catability of the *female*
sparrow;—the term ‘*kalabiṅka*’ being a masculine just like the term
‘bull.’

Others have explained that this name has been added for the purpose of
excluding (from the prohibition) the *wild* sparrow, which retires to
the forest during the rains. They are called ‘village-birds’ because of
their living in the villages during the greater part of the year; just
as is the case with the ‘wild buffalo.’

The prohibition of the *plava*, the *haṃsa*, and the *cakravāka* being
already got at from the general prohibition of all ‘web-footed birds’,
the separate mention of these is for the purpose of emphasising the
obligatory character of their exclusion.—the eating of the ‘*Ātya*’ and
other ‘web-footed’ birds being regarded as *optional*.

‘*Village-cock*’—the specification of the ‘*village* -cock’ permits the
eating of the wild cock.

“But why should there have been any suspicion regarding the
non-eatability of the *wild* cock at all?”

Because another *Smṛti* text says simply—‘Among birds, *the cock*’,
which indicates that all kinds of cock are equally ‘unfit to be eaten’;
it is for this reason that this general statement line been sought by
the present text, to be limited in its scope.

“But why cannot this he regarded as a case of option, since the present
text permits the eating of the wild crick, which the other text
forbids?”

This cannot he a case of option: it is a case of option only when there
are two contradictory texts of equal authority hearing upon the same
subject; in the present case however, there is no contradiction: there
is no difference in the actual teaching of the two *Smṛti-texts*
concerned: because it is quite reasonable to regard the general
statement as restricted in its scope; specially as a third independent
text has already been quoted above.

“If this be so, then the general prohibition regarding the web-footed
birds may be taken as restricted in its scope to the *Haṃsa* and other
specified birds: so that the prohibition does not extend to all crows
and web-footed birds.”

This would have been the case if the Smṛti-treatises were not the work
of a human author. In the case of works of non-human origin, if they
proceed from different sources, there would be no useful purpose by
making the general statement restricted to the particular case of the
*Haṃsa* and other birds; while in the case of the work of human authors,
if they proceed from different persons, it is quite possible that the
person who knows the truth in its general form is ignorant of it in the
restricted form, or the person who know it in the limited form is
ignorant of it in the wider form; so that when we come to consider the
source of the two statements, we assume the existence (in the Veda) of a
general statement as the source of one, and a particular statement as
the source of the other: and these two Vedic statements occurring in two
different recensional texts, the only reasonable course is to construe
them together, unless there are distinct injunctions bearing upon the
two statements. Specially as no such complaint can be raised against the
Vedas as—‘What is the use of the *general* statement if it is to be
taken in its restricted sense?’ There is no room for such a complaint,
because there is no author in the case against whom such a complaint
could be raised. Specially as in the case of a Vedic statement, the only
idea that is obtained is front the actual words of the text, only that
which can be derived from the words themselves; and there can be no
justification for the assuming of any other meaning, for any purpose
whatsoever.

What the ‘*Rajjudāla*’ and other birds are is to be learnt from persons
versed in the science of birds.—(12)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 540), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kalaviṅka*’ is the *caṭaka*, the sparrow; these being
already included under ‘*grāmanivāsinaḥ*’, their separate mention is
meant to indicate that they are *always* to be avoided; which implies
that the ‘*cāṣa*’ and other ‘*grāmanivāsi*’ birds *may be* eaten. \[All
this hitter note is attributed to Medhātithi by the writer; but no words
to this effect are found in Medhātithi; see *Translation* \].—The
epithet ‘*grāma*’ in ‘*grāmakukkuṭaḥ*’ indicates that *wild kukkuṭa* is
not forbidden; ‘*sārasa*’ in the bird called ‘*puṣkara*,’ which has a
long neck, long feet and is of blue colour;—‘*Rajjudāla*’ is the
*wood-pecker*;—‘*dātyūha*’ the *black-necked* bird;—‘*Śuka*’ is
*parrot*;—‘*sārikā*’ is well known by its own name.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 583).ted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 583).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.28-29).—(See above under 11.)

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.143).—‘Nor tame cocks and pigs.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.32-33, 35).—‘Among scratching birds, the tame cock
shall not be eaten; among pecking birds, the Plava shall not be eaten;
nor the swan, the *Bhāsa*, the Brahmani duck, or the falcon.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14-48).—‘Among birds, the scratchers, the peckers, the
web-footed, the *Kalaviṅka*, the water-hen, the flamingo, the Brahmani
duck, th e *Bhāsa*, the crow, the blue pigeon, the osprey, the *Cātaka*,
the dove, the crane, the black partridge, the grey heron, the vulture,
the falcon, the white egret, the ibis, the cormorant, the peewit, the
flying-fox, the night-flying birds, the wood-pecker, the sparrow, the
Railātaka, the green pigeon, the wag-tail, the village-cock, the parrot,
the starling, the cuckoo, the carnivorous birds and those living about
villages (should not be; eaten).’

*Viṣṇu* (51.3.29).—‘Village-hog, village-hen, monkey, cow—on eating
these one shall perform the Cāndrāyaṇa;...one shall fast for three
nights if he eat the *Kalaviṅka*, *Plava*, etc.,etc.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.172-174). (See under 11, 7 also.)—‘*Kalaviṅka*, Black
crow, *Kurara*, wood-pecker, web-footed birds, *Khañjarīṭa*, and strange
animals and birds—these one should avoid.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 541).—‘The following birds should not
be eaten: Crane, Swan, Dātyūha, etc., etc.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 542)\_\_‘The mushroom, the village-hog,
the web-footed birds, cocks,—by eating these the twice-born becomes
degraded.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do).—‘The partridge, the peacock, the pheasant, the white
partridge, the Vārdhrīṇasa bird and the duck, these Yama has himself
declared to be fit for eating.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

012	The sparrow, the Plava, the Hamsa, the Brahmani duck, the village-cock, the Sarasa crane, the Raggudala, the woodpecker, the parrot, and the starling,
</details>
