+++
title = "017 न भक्षयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall not eat solitary animals, nor unknown beasts and birds, even though indicated among those fit to be eaten; nor any five-nailed animals.—(17).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एकचराः** सर्पोलूकादय एकाकिनश् चरन्ति । **अज्ञातान्** नामतो जातिविशेषतश् च । **मृगद्विजान्** । मृगाः पक्षिणश् च न भक्ष्याः । **भक्ष्येष्व् अपि समुद्दिष्टान्** । ये प्रतिषिद्धास् ते ताद्रूप्ये असति भक्ष्यतां प्राप्ताः समुद्दिष्टा इव भवन्ति । न तु भक्ष्याणां समुद्देशो ऽस्ति । परिहर्तव्यतया विशेषतो ऽविज्ञाता भक्ष्य्पक्षपतिता[^४५] भक्ष्येष्व् अपि समुद्दिष्टा इत्य् एवम् उच्यन्ते । **पञ्चनखाश्** च वानरशृगालादयः । **सर्व**ग्रहणं पादपूरणार्थम् ॥ ५.१७ ॥


[^४५]:
     M G: 'vijñātān bhakṣypakṣapatitān
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Solitary*’—those animals that move about singly (not in herds); such
as serpents, owls and the like.

‘*Unknown*’—as regards *name* and *kind*.

‘*Beasts and birds*;’—neither beasts nor birds are fit to be taken.

‘*Even though indicated among those fit to be eaten*’—Those that are not
actually forbidden are, to that extent, regarded as fit to be eaten; and
hence indirectly ‘indicated’ as such. In reality, there is no direct
indication of those fit to be eaten. Those that are not specially
recognised as to be avoided come to be regarded as fit to be eaten; and
these are spoken of as ‘*indicated as fit to be eaten*’.

‘*Fire-nailed animals*:’—*e.g*. the Monkey, the Jackal and the like.

‘*Any*’—has been added for filling up the metre.—(17)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 544), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Ekacara*’ are those animals which, as a rule, roam
about alone, such for instance as serpents;—‘*ajñātāḥ*’—whose name and
species are unknown, *i.e*., one should not eat unknown animals which,
though not falling under any species either generally or specifically
prohibited, are understood by implication to be included under those
that are permitted;—nor should one eat any five-nailed animals, with the
exception of the *śaśaka* and the rest (enumerated in the next verse).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 5.17-18)  
**

*Gautama* (17-27).—‘Five-nailed animals should not be eaten, excepting
the hedge-hog, the hare, the porcupine, the iguana, the rhinoceros and
the tortoise.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12-5).—‘Five five-nailed animals may be eaten—*viz*.,
the porcupine, the iguana, the hare, the hedge-hog, the tortoise and the
rhinoceros, except (perhaps) the rhinoceros.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17-37).—‘Five-nailed animals should not be eaten,
excepting the iguana, the tortoise, the porcupine, the rhinoceros, the
hare and the *Putīkaśa*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.39, 40, 44, 47).—‘Among five-nailed animals, the
porcupine, the hedge-hog, the hare, the tortoise and the iguana may he
eaten; among domestic animals, those having only one row of teeth,
except the camel; those not mentioned as fit for eating should not be
eaten; regarding the wild boar and the rhinoceros, there are conflicting
opinions.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.6, 26, 27).—‘On eating the flesh of five-nailed
animals,—except the hare, the porcupine, the hedge-hog, the rhinoceros
and the tortoise,—one should fast seven days; on eating the flesh of the
ass, the camel and the crow, one should perform the *Cāndrāyana*,—also
on eating unknown flesh, or flesh from the slaughter-house, or dried
flesh.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.174, 177).—‘Unknown animals and birds, flesh from the
slaughter-house and dried flesh (should not be eaten). Among five-nailed
animals, the following may be eaten: the porcupine, the hedge-hog, the
alligator, the tortoise and the have.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 543).—‘Among animals, the following
should not be eaten: the cow, the camel, the ass, the horse, the
elephant, the lion, the leopard, the bear, the *Śarubha*, serpents and
boa constrictors, the rat, the mouse, the cat, the mongoose, the
village-hog, the dog, the jackal, the tiger, the black-faced monkey, the
man and the monkey.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

017	Let him not eat solitary or unknown beasts and birds, though they may fall under (the categories of) eatable (creatures), nor any five-toed (animals).
</details>
