+++
title = "024 यत् किम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Such Food and eatables as are mixed with oils may be eaten though stale, if unspoilt; so also what may be the remnant of a sacrificial offering.—(24)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**भक्ष्यं यत् किंचित् स्नेहसंयुक्तम्** । **भोज्यम्** ओदनादि । भुक्तिभुज्योर् एकार्थत्वे ऽपि पृथगुपादानाद् विषयभेदो ऽयं प्रतीयते । **अगर्हितं** शुक्तताम् अनापन्नम् । **तत् पर्युषितम् अप्य् आद्यम्** । रात्र्यन्तरे पर्युषितम् उच्यते । पूर्वेद्युः सिद्धम् अप्य् अपरेद्युः पर्युषितं भवति । **स्नेहसंयुक्तम्** इति । एवं संदिह्यते । किं यत् स्नेहसंयुक्तं सत् पर्युषितं रसमिश्रशाकादि तत् पर्युषितम् अशितव्यम्, उत शुष्कस्यापि[^४९] पर्युषितस्य भक्षणकाले[^५०] स्नेहसंयोगः कर्तव्यः । भक्षापूपाद्य् अपि पर्युषितं भोजनकाले स्नेहेन संयोज्य भक्षयितव्यम् इति । 


[^५०]:
     M G: bhakṣaṇam | kāle


[^४९]:
     M G: śuktasyāpi

- <u>अत्र संदिह्यते</u>-[^५१] स्नेहयुक्तानां भक्ष्यतोच्यते **तत् पर्युषितम् आद्यम्** इति । उद्दिश्यमानं स्नेहसंयुक्तम्[^५२] निपतनं न पुनर् विधेयार्थे । न हि तच्छब्दसंबन्धो ऽस्य श्रुतो यत् पर्युषितं तत्[^५३] स्नेहसंयुक्तम् आद्यम् इति । 


[^५३]:
     M G omit: tat


[^५२]:
     M G add: idaṃ


[^५१]:
     M G: ataḥ saṃdihya yāvatā yat

- <u>उच्यते</u> । हविःशेषाणां पर्युषितानाम् अस्नेहसंयुक्तानां तेषां वचनम् अनर्थम् । न च तेषां स्नेहसंयुक्तानां परिवासः संभवति । एवं च तेषां वचनम् अर्थवद् भवति यदि भोजनकाले तेषां स्नेहसंयोगो नापेक्ष्यते । अतस् तेषां तावद् भोजनकाल एव स्नेहसंयोगनिरपेक्षतया वचनस्यार्थवत्त्वम् । 

- <u>यद्य् एवं</u> तथापि न संदेहः । अर्थवत्त्वाद् विशेषपदस्य विधेयर्थता स्नेहसंयुक्तशब्दस्य[^५४] न्याय्या । 


[^५४]:
     M G 1st ed.: snehasaṃyuktā

- <u>उच्यते</u> । एतावद् अत्र संदेहे बीजम् । यथाश्रुतसंबन्धस्य बलीयस्त्वात् किं हविःशेषपदम् अनुवादो ऽस्तु उतानर्थनकत्वं मा प्रापद् इति यत् पर्युषितं तेन स्नेहसंबन्धः क्रियताम् । तत्रानर्थक्याद् व्यवहितकल्पना ज्यायसी । समाचारान् निर्णयः । 

- सर्पिस्तैलवसामज्जाः **स्नेहाः** ॥ ५.२४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Whatever food is mixed with oils*.’—‘*Food*’ stands for Rice etc.
Though the roots to ‘eat’ and to ‘feed’ are synonymous, yet the two
terms ‘food’ and ‘eatables’ have been used with a view to the various
articles of food.

‘*Unspoilt*’—here stands for what has not become sour by keeping.

Such food ‘*may b* *e* *eaten*, *though stale*’. That is called ‘stale’
which has been kept over night. What is cooked on one day also becomes
‘stale’ the next day.

‘*Mixed with oils*.’—In regard to this the following question is
raised:—

“Does this mean that whatever in the shape of vegetable-juice etc. has
been cooked with oils should be eaten even when stale?—Or, that oils are
to be mixed up with dry articles of food, at the time that they are
going to be eaten stale? According to the latter view stale cakes and
sweets also would have to be eaten only after having been *mixed with
oils*.”

There is, it is argued, no room for any such doubt; since what is
asserted by the words ‘may be eaten though stale’ is only the eatability
of food mixed with oils; so that the epithet ‘mixed with oils’ is part
of the Subject, and not of the Predicate. Nor do we find it referred to
by the pronoun ‘*tat*’, ‘that’, by any such form of expression as ‘what
is stale, *that* may be eaten mixed with oils’ (which would make the
epithet part of the Predicate).

The answer to this is that there is still some ground for doubt; as
(according to the explanation just suggested) there would be no point in
the separate mention of the ‘remnants of sacrificial offering’, which
are stale and *not mixed* *with* *oils* (the latter being implied by
their being mentioned apart from ‘food mixed with oils;’ because there
is no chance of these remnants being ‘mixed with oils’ and becoming
‘stale’. Consequently the separate mention of these can have some sense
only if in their case it were not considered necessary to mix oils at
the time of eating. So that the separate mention of these becomes
justified only if, in the case of these Remnants, it be not necessary to
mix oils at the time of eating (*which is considered necessary in the*
*case* *of the other articles of food*.)

But, even so, there need not be any doubt. For in that case, it would be
only right to take the epithet ‘mixed with oils’ as part of the
Predicate, for the purpose of justifying the separate mention of the
‘Remnants of sacrificial offerings’. \[So that thus also, the meaning
would be quite clear, though different from what we had explained
before.\]

In answer to this it is argued that there is only this ground for doubt
that in view of the fact that the direct construction of the words as
they stand is always to be preferred to any other roundabout
constructions,—would it be right to regard the mention of the
‘sacrificial remnants’ as merely reiterative (and not injunctive) \[ in
which case it may well be left pointless\]? Or that, inorder to guard
against the mention being pointless, the words should be construed to
mean that whatever is stale should be mixed with oils at the time of
eating?

On this point there is no doubt; rather than allow the words of the text
to be regarded us pointless, it is far more reasonable to have recourse
to the indirect method of construction. The real decision however
depends entirely upon usage.

‘*Oils*.’—This term stands for butter, oil, fat and bone-marrow—(24).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 523);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 452);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 616);—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 291).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 5.24-25)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (51.35).—‘Preparations of barley and wheat mixed with oils,
soured substances and sugar-candy—barring these, if one eats anything
kept overnight, he should fast.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.169).—‘Food kept: overnight, or kept for a long time,
may he eaten if mixed with oils: as also preparations of wheat, barley
and milk, even without, oils.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 523).—‘Cakes, gruel, fried grains,
fried-barley flour, vegetables, meat, curries, rice-sesamum,
barley-meal, milk-vice, and things mixed with oils,—all this may he
eaten, even though kept overnight; hut substances soured by keeping
should he avoided.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

024	All lawful hard or soft food may be eaten, though stale, (after having been) mixed with fatty (substances), and so may the remains of sacrificial viands.
</details>
