+++
title = "026 एतद् उक्तम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has been described is full what is fit and what unfit to be eaten by twice-born men. Next I am going to explain the rule regarding the eating and avoiding of meat.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आद्येन श्लोकार्धेन पूर्वप्रकरणम् अवच्छिनत्ति । तद् एतद् अनन्तरम् अनुक्रान्तं प्रकरणम् एतत्[^५५] द्विजातीनां न शूद्राणाम् इति, उत्तरं तु यद् वक्ष्यते तच् छूद्राणाम् अपीति प्रकरणव्यवच्छेदप्रयोजनम् । 


[^५५]:
     M G 1st ed.: eva

- अतश् च मांसभक्षणे प्रकारो वक्ष्यते । यच् च तद्वर्जनेन फलं तच् छूद्रस्यापि भवतीति । अन्यथा "अभक्ष्याणि द्विजातीनाम्" (म्ध् ५.५) इत्य् अधिकाराल् लशुनादिष्व् इव[^५६] शूद्रस्य मांसभक्षणे ऽपि कामचारः स्यात् । 


[^५६]:
     M G 1st ed.: atha

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं देवाद्यर्चने शिष्टस्य मांसस्य भक्ष्यता वक्ष्यते- "देवान् पितॄंश् चार्चयित्वा खादन् मांसं न दुष्यति" (म्ध् ५.३२) इति । देवाद्यर्चनं मेध्येन मांसेन । ये च द्विजातीनां प्रतिषिद्धा मृगशकुन्तास् ते ऽमेध्याः । अतश् च तेषां मांसेन देवार्चनासंभवाद् अतच्छेषस्याभक्ष्यत्वाद्[^५७] अन्ये ऽपि प्रकरणभेदाः, यथा ब्राह्मणादीनां मृगपक्षिणः प्रतिषिद्धाः, ते शूद्रस्यापि प्रकारान्तरेण प्रतिषिद्धा भवन्ति । तत्र प्रकरणभेदेन न किंचिद्[^५८] उच्यते । लशुनादिप्रतिषेधः शूद्रस्य न भवति ।


[^५८]:
     M G: -bhedena kenacid


[^५७]:
     M G: ataccheṣasya bhakṣyatvād

- <u>अस्ति तावत्</u> प्रकरणभेदेन प्रयोजनं लशुनादिप्रतिषेधे शूद्रस्याधिकारो मा भूद् इति । मांसे ऽपि देवाद्यर्चने गृहस्थस्याधिकाराद् अगृहस्थस्य शूद्रस्य यथाकाम्यम् । 

- <u>ननु</u> च पाकयज्ञे शूद्रस्याधिकारतः स्थित एव[^५९] । भोजनं गृहस्थानां च विहितम् । न च लशुनादिभिः पाकयज्ञाः क्रियन्ते । ततश् च नापि शूद्रस्य यथाकाम्यं लशुनादयो भक्ष्याः स्युः । 


[^५९]:
     M G 1st ed: sthitasya

- <u>को दोषः</u> । 

- <u>द्विजातिग्रहणम्</u> अनर्थकम् । 

- परिहृतम् एतद् अगृहस्थस्य प्रोषितस्य वा कामचारः । न च गृहस्थेन यद् अहुतं तन् न भोक्तव्यम् । "शेषभुग् भवेत्" (म्ध् ३.१०७) इत्य् अस्यायम् अर्थः- अकृतवैश्वदेवक्रियेण न भोक्तव्यम् । तत्र यस्यैव यागसाधनता द्रव्यस्य तद् एव मेध्यं होतव्यम् । अन्ये तु भोजनकाले कुतश्चिद् आहृत्य मध्यगेहे वा भुज्यते । तच् चाहुतशेषम्[^६०] अपि न प्रतिषिद्धम् । मांसे तु पुनर्वचनान् नियमः- न कदाचिद् देवानुपयुक्तं भोज्यम् इति । 


[^६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: ca hutaśeṣam

- <u>यदि</u> चातुर्वर्ण्यस्यात्राधिकारस् तदा यद् वक्ष्यति परस्तात्[^६१] शुद्धविधौ "चतुर्णाम् अपि वर्णानाम्" (म्ध् ५.५७) इति तद् अनर्थकम् । 


[^६१]:
     M G add: tu

- <u>तत्रैव</u> तस्य प्रयोजनं वक्ष्यामः । 

- <u>अथ</u> श्वमांसाद्य् अप्य् शूद्रस्य भक्ष्यं प्राप्नोति द्विजातिग्रहणात् पूर्वत्र । 

- <u>किं त्व्</u> एकादशे "विड्वराहखरोष्ट्राणाम्" इत्यादिश्लोकत्रयनिर्दिष्टाः (म्ध् ११.१५३–५५) शूद्रस्यापि न भक्ष्या इति ज्ञापकं दर्शयिष्यामः ॥ ५.२६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first half of the verse cuts off the preceding section; and what is
implied by this cutting off of the section is that the section that has
gone before pertains to the twice-born castes only, not to *Śūdras*,
while what follows applies to *Śūdras* also. It is for this reason that
several methods of eating meat shall be described, and the reward
resulting from the giving up of meat-eating shall accrue to the *Śūdra*
also. If this were not so, then, in the matter of eating meat also, the
*Śūdra* would be free to do what he likes; just as he is in regard to
the eating of garlic and other things that has been forbidden for
‘twice-born persons’ only, in verses 5 *ete. etc*. above.

“If it is as you say, then there is the following difficulty:—In verse
32 below, the Text is going to declare the eatability of the meat left
from the worship of the Gods:—*viz*. ‘One does not become contaminated
by sin if he eats meat after having worshipped the Gods and the
Pitṛs’;—now the ‘worship of the gods’ etc. can be done only with such
meaf as is sacred; and those beasts and birds that have been forbidden
for twice-born people (in the next section) are not sacred; hence, the
worshipping of Gods etc. with the meat of these beasts and birds being
impossible,—and what does not form the ‘remnant of worship’ being unfit
to be eaten,—these other beasts and birds also, mentioned in a different
context, become forbidden for the twice-born people; and the prohibition
of these could be made to apply to the *Śūdra* also by some such other
method (of reasoning). So that there is no point in the dividing of the
sections (simply for making the prohibitions of the next section
applicable to *Śūdras* also). And as for the prohibition of garlic and
such things (that have been forbidden specially for twice-born persons),
it is not applicable to *Śūdras* at all.”

There is this useful purpose served by the dividing of the two sections,
that the prohibition of garlic and other things ceases to be applicable
to the *Śūdra*. As regards meat also, in as much as the *Householder*
only is entitled to do the worshipping of Gods, it is a matter purely
optional for such *Śūdras* as are not ‘householders’.

“As a matter of fact, *Śūdras* also are entitled to the performance of
sacrifices with cooked food; the eating of food has also been prescribed
for Householders; but no ‘sacrifices with cooked food’ are ever offered
with garlic and such other things. So that these things may be eaten, or
not, by *Śūdras*, entirely according to their option.—‘Why’? What would
be the harm? In that case the mention of ‘twiceborn persons’ (in
connection with the forbidding of garlic, etc.) would have no point at
all.’

This has been already answered by the explanation that one who is not a
Householder, or who is travelling away from home, may do what he likes.
Nor is it necessary that the Householder shall not eat what has not been
offered in oblations; the meaning of the declaration ‘one shall live on
remnants’ being that ‘he shall not eat until he has made the offering to
the Vishedevas.’ Now, that substance alone is ‘sacred’, and can be
offered as oblation, which has been prescribed as to be offered at, and
thus helping the fulfilment of, a sacrifice. Some people fetch food from
somewhere, at the time of eating, and eat it in their own house; and in
this case even though the food may not be the ‘remnant of a sacrifice’,
it would not be forbidden. As regards *meat* however, we have the
restriction directly imposed, that ‘it shall never be eaten unless it
has been offered to the Gods.’

“If this is applicable to all the four castes, then there is no point in
what is going to be said (under 5.57) in connection with purifications.”

The use of that we shall explain at that place.

“In view of the mention of *twice-born people* in the foregoing section,
it follows that *day’s meat* and such things also are fit to be eaten by
*Śūdras*.”

Under Discourse XI we shall show that there are indications to the
effect that ‘the village-pig’, the ass, the camel, and other animals
mentioned in the three verses (157 etc.) are ‘unfit to be eaten’ for the
*Śūdra* also.—(26).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 526), which adds the
following notes:—The rules regarding eating that have gone before are
meant for the ‘twice-born’, not for the Śūdra; hence for the latter
there is no harm in eating garlic and other things. But, according to
*Kalpataru*, the eating of the crow and such like animals and birds—even
though included among those mentioned,—must be considered wrong, even
for the Śūdra;—being as they are entirely condemned by all cultured
men.—The mention of the ‘twice-born’ in this verse implies that the
forthcoming prohibition regarding meat is meant for all the four castes.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 5.26-27)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.179).—‘When one’s life is in danger, at Śrāddhas, when
it has been prepared for Brāhmaṇas, and when it has been offered in the
worshipping cf gods and Pitṛs, if one eats meat, one incurs no sin.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 251).—‘Invited at a Śrāddha, if one abandons the
meat that is offered, one remains in hell, etc., etc.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 528).—‘Now listen to the law
relating to Kṣatriyas. He incurs no sin if he eats meat obtained by his
own valour; all wild animals are such as have been already offered to
the gods by Agastya; that is why hunting is an honoured practice; it is
for this reason that all royal sages go about hunting, and thereby they
incur no sin.’

*Viśvāmitra* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 528).—(Same as Yājñavalkya,
above.)

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Eating meat in course of eating the remnants of
offerings, one incurs no sin; similarly, if one eats as a medicine, or
for saving his life, or by invitation, or at sacrifices.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 529).—‘One may eat consecrated meat
*once*, for the sake of a Brāhmaṇa; also when invited at a rite in
honour of gods or Pitṛs.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 529).—‘Under the following four
circumstances alone should one eat meat—(a) when suffering from an
otherwise incurable disease, (b) when duly invited, (a) when the meat
has been offered as a libation, and (d) when invited by a Brāhmaṇa.
Apart from these one shall never eat meat.’

*Hārīta* (Do. 530).—‘If one eat needlessly-prepared meat, one should
perforin the Kṛcchra. But for the sake of the Brāhmaṇas, he may eat as
much as he likes.’

*Visṇu* (Do.).—(Same as Manu 36.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	Thus has the food, allowed and forbidden to twice-born men, been fully described; I will now propound the rules for eating and avoiding meat.
</details>
