+++
title = "040 ओषध्यः पशवो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Herbs, animals, trees, beasts and birds, reaching death for the sake of sacrifices, attain advancements.—(40)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>कथं</u> पुनर् यज्ञे हिंसादोषो नास्ति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । हिंसा हिंस्यमानस्य महान् अपकारः, प्राणवियोगेन पुत्रदारधनविभवादिवियोगेन सर्वानर्थोत्पत्तेर् दुष्कृतस्य च समनन्तरं नरकादिफलविपाकस्य प्रत्यासत्तेः । यज्ञे तु हतानाम् उपकारः, नापकारः, नरकादिफलानुत्पत्तेः । यतो यज्ञे **निधनं** विनाशं गता **उच्छ्रितीर्** उत्कर्षं जातितो देवगन्धर्वयोनित्वं द्वीपान्तरेषूत्तरकुरुप्रभृतिषु वर्षान्तरे वा जन्म **प्राप्नुवन्ति** ।

- अर्थवादश् चायम् । न ह्य् अत्र विधिः श्रूयते, **प्राप्नुवन्ति** इति वर्तमानोपदेशात्[^११२] । न चार्थवादात् "प्रतितिष्ठन्ति" इतिवद् विधिप्रतिपत्तिर् युक्ता, विध्यन्तरस्याभावाद् असंभवाच् च । 


[^११२]:
     DK (5: 324): vartamānāpadeśāt

- सर्वो ऽयम् अविधिमांसभक्षणप्रतिषेधशेषः । ऐहलोकसंपाद्यतयाप्य् अयं प्रतिषेधः- "न त्व् एव तु वृथा हन्तुं पशुम् इच्छेत्" (म्ध् ५.३७) इति । यच् चाभ्यनुज्ञानम् "यज्ञार्थं पसवः सृष्टाः" (म्ध् ५.३९) इति, तत् सर्वं भषणप्रतिषेधतया प्रतीयते । तथा च वक्ष्यति "नाकृत्वा प्राणिनां हिंसाम्" (म्ध् ५.४८) इत्यादि ।

- न चात्र विधेर् अस्ति संभवः । न तिरश्चाम् अधिकारः संभवति, विशेषविज्ञानाभावात् । न चानधिकृतस्य कर्तृत्वम् । नाप्य् अकर्तृत्वे शास्त्रीयात् कर्मणः फलोत्पत्तिः । न ह्य् अत्र दृष्टा वस्तुस्वाभाव्येन[^११३] फलोत्पत्तिः । यथा विषम् अविदुषो ऽपि पीतवतो जनयत्य् एव स्वफलम् । नैवं वैदिकार्थाः । 


[^११३]:
     M G J: dṛṣṭavastusvābhāvyena (I follow the suggestion of DK 5: 624)

- अचैतन्याच् चौषध्यादीनाम्[^११४] ऋत्विङ्न्यायो ऽपि नास्ति । दृष्टं किल कुतश्चन कर्मणः परप्रयुक्ताद् अप्य् ऋत्विजां फलम्- "यः कामयेत[^११५] पापीयान् स्यात्" (च्ड़्। गोब् २.३.३) इत्यादि । तत्र विध्यन्तरशेषत्वाभावात् स्पष्टत्वाच्[^११६] च विधिप्रतिपत्तेर् मनुष्याधिकारत्वाच् च शास्त्रस्य युक्तो ऽङ्गव्यापारसमाश्रितो[^११७] वाचनिकस् तावन्मात्रो ऽधिकारः । यथा परकीयाश्वमेधावभृथे ब्राह्मणस्य प्रायश्चित्तम् उक्तम् । इह त्व् अधिकार एव नास्तीत्य् उक्तम् ।


[^११७]:
     M G: yuktāṅga-


[^११६]:
     M G 1st ed.: spṛṣṭatvāc


[^११५]:
     DK (5: 624): kāmayet


[^११४]:
     M G J: cauṣadhādīnām (I follow the suggestion of DK 5: 624)

- **ओषध्यो** दर्भादयः । **पशवश्** छागादयः । **वृक्षाः** पूज्याः । **तिर्यञ्चः** अपशवो ऽपि पशवो येषां हविष्ट्वेन[^११८] चोदना "कपिञ्जलान् आलभते" (व्स् २४.२०) इति । भारप्रवहणाद्[^११९] अनड्वाहस् तिर्यञ्चो वाजपेयादौ तिर्यञ्च इति व्यपदिश्यन्ते । यद्य् अपि तेषां तत्र निधनं नास्ति तथापि यावती च पीडा विद्यत इति सा निधनशब्देन लक्ष्यते । **पक्षिणः** कपिञ्जलादयः । यद्य् अपि ते पशुत्वेन चोच्यन्ते,[^१२०] अप्रसिद्धतरप्रयोगास् तु "सप्त ग्राम्याः पशवः सप्तारण्याः" (श्ब् ९.५.२.८) इति । गवादयो ऽपक्षिणः । चतुष्पाज्जातिवचनः पशुशब्दः । गोबलीवर्दवद् वा भेदो द्रष्टव्यः ॥ ५.४० ॥


[^१२०]:
     DK (5:624) suggests: codyante


[^११९]:
     M G 1st ed.: bhīmapravahaṇād


[^११८]:
     M G J: haviṣyena (I follow the suggestion of DK 5: 624)

_यावत्यः काश्चिच् छास्त्रचोदितहिंसास् ताः संक्ष्प्य दर्शयति ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“How is it known that killing at sacrifices involves no sin?”

The answer is as follows:—‘killing’ is the greatest injury that can
befall the being killed; because it involves such great evil as the loss
of life, involving separation from wife, children and riches, and all
the attendant evil consequences; and also because it carries the
entities nearer to the fruition of their sins in the form of hell and
the like. But when an animal is killed at a sacrifice, this killing
becomes a great benefit conferred upon it, and it is not an injury;
because it does not lead it to hell nr any such undesirable conditions.
That this is so follows from the fact that those ‘*reaching death*’—
destruction—at a sacrifice —‘*attain advancements*’—higher positions, in
regard to caste and so forth;—being born as a God or a Gandharva, or as
men born in better countries or continents—such as the Uttarakuru and
the like.

The whole of this is a purely commendatory description. We do not find
here any Injunction: the verb ‘*attain*’ being in the simple Present
tense. Nor is there any justification for deducing an Injunction from
the commendatory description,—as is done in the case of the passage
‘*Pratitiṣṭhanti etc*.’ (*v* *ide*, *Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra*, 4.3.17. *et seq*);
because in the present case neither there is, nor is there any
possibility of, any other Injunction (apart from those already set forth
in the text).

The whole of this descriptive section is supplementary to the
prohibition of the eating of unlawful meat; and the upshot of the
prohibition contained in these verses is that ‘one should never seek to
kill animals needlessly.’ (verse 37) As for the sanction (of killing)
implied in the statement—‘animals have been created for the purpose of
sacrifices’ (39),—all this is understood as involving the prohibition of
*eating* which is going to be distinctly emphasised below in verse 48.

Nor can any Injunction (such as ‘desiring advancement, the animal shall
die at a sacrifice’) be deduced from the text. Because such an
Injunction could not be intended for the animals; for the simple reason
that they would not understand it. And those for whom the Injunction is
not intended cannot be the agent; and unless one is an agent, he cannot
obtain any reward declared in the scriptures. Specially as in the
present case, the result spoken of does not proceed in any perceptible
manner from the nature of the thing involved; as there is, for instance,
in the case of the poison, which produces its results even on ignorant
persons who take it. There is no such thing in the case of things spoken
of in the Veda.

Further, since the herbs and other things spoken of here ore unconscious
beings, the ‘principle of the priests’ cannot apply to their case. That
is to say, it is found that in the case of sacrificial performances,
results are spoken of as accruing to one person (the sacrificer) from
the acts that are actually done by others,—*i*. *e*., the priests
officiating for him; *e.g*., in the case of the passage—‘he desires one
to become worse etc,’ In the case of such passages we admit of an
Injunction, because what is there stated is not capable of being taken
as supplementary to any other Injunction, and secondly because the
indication of the Injunction, is quite clear, and lastly, because the
Injunction indicated is found to be one that pertains to human beings.

In the case of all scriptural statements, we are entitled to deduce just
as much us may be reasonably deduced from the actual words of the text.
For instance, it has been declared that the Brāhmaṇa joining in the
sacrificial bath of other people should have to perform an expiatory
rite \[and we have to accent this, even though we fail to see any reason
for it\]. In the present case, however, there is no possibility of any
Injunction being addressed to the beings concerned (all of which are
inanimate).

‘*Herbs*,’—grass and the like.

‘*Animate*,’—the goat and other beasts (which are mentioned as fit for
being offered at sacrifices).

‘*Trees*,’—such as are objects of worship.

‘*Beasts*,’—those which, though not ordinarily regarded as fit for
sacrificing, happen to be mentioned, in some passages, as to be offered;
*e.g*., ‘one shall kill *partridges*.’ Though at the *Vājapeya* and
similar sacrifices, the calves are used only for the purpose of carrying
loads, yet they are called ‘beasts;’ and even though these do not suffer
actual *death*, yet the term ‘death’ in their case stands for all the
sufferings that they undergo.

‘*Bird*.”—the Kapiñjala and the rest; even though these are sometimes
spoken of as ‘animals’, yet, as a rule, they are not known by that name:
for in such passages as there are seven tame animals and seven wild
animals’, the animals meant are the cow and the rest, which are *not
birds*; in fact the term ‘*paśu*’, ‘animals, denotes *quadrupods*; or
the difference between ‘animals’ and ‘birds’ may be regarded as similar
to that between the ‘*go*’ and the^(‘)*balvarda*’ (the former term being
wider than the latter) (40).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 538), which explains
‘*ucchṛtiḥ*’ as ‘advancement’.

*Medhātithi* (P. 403, l. 22)—*Pratitiṣṭhantītivat*’—This refers to
*Mīmāṃsā Sūtṛa* 4.3.17 *et. seq*., which embodies what has been called
the ‘*Rātrisattra-nyāya*’. In connection with the ‘*Rātri*’ offerings,
it is said that ‘he who offers these obtains respectability &c.;’ and in
regard to this the question arises whether this latter passage is a mere
*arthavāda*, or it describes the result that really follows from the
offerings; and the conclusion is that, inasmuch as no other mention of
the result of the offerings is found anywhere, the passage in question
must be taken as describing the results actually following from them.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (51.63).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

040	Herbs, trees, cattle, birds, and (other) animals that have been destroyed for sacrifices, receive (being reborn) higher existences.
</details>
