+++
title = "048 नाऽकृत्वा प्राणिनाम्"

+++

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सर्वस्य हिंसाप्रतिषेधश्लोकसंघातस्य मांसभक्षणसेषतां दर्शयति । यावत् प्राणिनो न हतास् तावन् **मांसं नोत्पद्यते** । हिंसा चातिशयेन दुःखावहा । **तस्मान् मांसं विवर्जयेत्** ।

- <u>ननु</u> च स्वयं मृतानां भवत्य् एव मांसम्, किम् इदम् उच्यते "नाकृत्वा" इति । 

- <u>अर्थवादो</u> ऽयम् । स्वयं मृतानां च मांसं रोगहेतुत्वाद् अप्राप्तम् एव । न ह्य् अदत्वा मांसं भक्ष्यते । न च रोगहेतोर् दानम् अस्ति । 

- **उत्पद्यत** इति मांसस्य हिंसानिमित्तत्वात् कर्तृव्यपदेशे[^१२९] समानकर्तृकत्वं भवत्य् एवाविरुद्धम् । अथ वा **उत्पद्यत** इति **न च स्वर्ग्य** इति । न स्वर्गानुत्पत्तिहेतुमात्रम् अभिप्रेतम् अपि तु नरकादिदुःखहेतुत्वम्[^१३०] ॥ ५.४८ ॥


[^१३०]:
     M G 1st ed.:-hetūnām


[^१२९]:
     M G: kartṛvyapadeśa
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse show’s that all the verses forbidding the killing of animals
are auxiliary to the prohibition of meat-eating.

As a matter of fact, until animals have been killed, meat cannot be
obtained; and killing is very painful. Hence one should avoid meat.

“Meat can be obtained from animals that die of themselves; how is it
then that it is said that it cannot be obtained *without encompassing
the death of animals*?”

The verse is a purely commendatory exaggeration. Further, there can be
no idea of any one eating the meat of animals dying of themselves, for
the simple reason that such meat is the source of disease. Meat is never
eaten without being offered, and what is a source of disease can never
be offered as gift.

‘*Utpadyate*’;—the meat is brought about by *killing*; hence the
nominative of *hilling* and of *obtaining* may be regarded as one and
the same; so that there is nothing incongruous in the expression
‘*nākṛtvā utpadyate*’. Or, ‘*utpadyate*’ may be construed along with
‘*does not lead to Heaven*.’ What is meant is, not only that it does not
lead to heaven, but also that it leads to hell and other evils.—(48)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 5.48-49)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 719), which adds
that the prohibition contained here pertains to the eating of meat
obtained by such killing of animals as is prohibited,—and not to that of
meat obtained by purchase; and this on the ground that it is prefaced by
the deprecating of the act of *killing*.

Verse 48 only is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 279).
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

048	Meat can never be obtained without injury to living creatures, and injury to sentient beings is detrimental to (the attainment of) heavenly bliss; let him therefore shun (the use of) meat.
</details>
