+++
title = "051 अनुमन्ता विशसिता"

+++

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अन्येन हन्यमानं स्वप्रयोजनतो यद्य् अन्यो ऽनुमोदते साध्व् अयं हन्ता करोतीत्य् **अनुमन्ता** । **विशसिता** हतस्याङ्गविभागकारः । **उपहर्ता** परिवेषकः । **खादक** इत्य् एते सर्वे **घातकाः** ।

- अघातकेषु खादनसंस्कारविक्रयादिकर्तृषु घातकत्वे ऽध्यारोपिते निन्दा, न पुनस् तत्वत एते घातका एव । लौकिकी हि वधक्रिया प्राणत्यागफला । तस्य कर्ता घातकः स्मृतितो गम्यते । स्वतन्त्रः कर्तेति विशेषशास्त्रादिना यः प्राणवियोजनं प्राणिनां क्रोति स हन्तोच्यते । क्रयविक्रयाद्याश् च किर्यास् ततो ऽन्या एव ।

- <u>ननु</u> चेयम् अपि स्मृतिर् एव, एते अनुमन्तृप्रभृतयो घातका इति ।

- <u>नेदं</u> शब्दार्थसंबन्धे प्रमाणम्, किं तर्हि धर्माधर्मयोः । अभियुक्ततरो हि तत्र भवान् पाणिनिः । मन्वादयश् च लोकप्रसिद्धैः पदार्थैर् व्यवहरन्ति, न शब्दार्थसंबन्धविधिं स्मरन्ति । प्रयोक्तारो ह्य् एते न स्मर्तारः ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "तम् आचार्यं प्रक्षते" (म्ध् २.१४०) इत्यादेः स्मरन्त्य् एते ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । न तत्र शास्त्रस्मृतिविरोधः । न च तेषां वाक्यानाम् अन्यत् प्रयोजनम् अस्ति । इह तु गौणेनापि प्रयोजनेनार्थवादतयाप्य् उपपत्तेर् न घातकत्वं शक्यम् अवसातुम् । 

- <u>ये ऽप्य् आहुर्</u> "भक्षकश् चेन् न विद्यते वधको ऽपि न विद्यत इति भक्षणप्रयुक्त एव वधः, प्रयोजकश् च कर्ता स्मर्यते । ततो मुख्यम् एव घातकत्वम् । अतो घातकप्रायश्चित्तम् एव खादकस्य युक्तम्" इति ।

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> इति[^१३१] ब्रूमः । पृथक्प्रायश्चित्तं हतानां रसास्वादकस्य "जग्ध्वा मांसम् अभक्ष्यं च" इति (म्ध् ११.१५१ ) । 


[^१३१]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: tad ayuktam iti

- यद् अपि[^१३२] प्रयोजकत्वेन कर्तृत्वम् उक्तं तद् अपि नैवास्ति । इदं हि तस्य लक्षणम्- 


[^१३२]:
     M G: yadi

- प्रेषणाध्येषणाभ्यां तु यः स्वतन्त्रस्य चोदकः ।

- स कर्ता चैव[^१३३] हेतुश् च मुख्यो नोपचरन् परः ॥ इति । 


[^१३३]:
     M G: sa eva

वधको हि जीवनप्रयुक्त्या प्रवर्तते मांसविक्रयेण जीविष्यामीति, न तु खादकेन विनियुज्यते । 

- अथ तत्समर्थाचरणं प्रयोजकत्वम् । यो ऽयं क्रियां कर्तुम् अध्यवसितस् तत्रानुकूल्येन यः संविधित्सुः स प्रयोजक इति । एतद् अप्य् अत्र नैवास्ति । साधनोपनिधानं त्रसतः पशोर् अस्वतन्त्रीकरणं[^१३४] खड्गोपनयनम् इत्य् एवं संविधानशब्दवाच्यं युक्तम् । तेन विना क्रिया न निष्पद्यते । 


[^१३४]:
     J: asvatantrākaraṇaṃ

- अथ यदर्थः क्रियारम्भः स प्रयोजकश् चेति चेत्, माणवकम् अध्यापयतीत्य् अध्यापनहेतुकर्तृसंज्ञाप्रतिलम्भः,[^१३५]  न ह्य् अध्ययनम् अध्यापयत्यर्थः[^१३६] । 


[^१३६]:
     M G 1st ed.: adhyāpayati


[^१३५]:
     M G 1st ed.: adhyāpakahetu-

- न चासौ कंचिद्[^१३७] उद्दिश्य हनने प्रवर्तते । येनास्य तदर्थनिरूपणाय भक्षणे ऽनर्था प्रवृत्तिः स्यात् । सर्व इमे स्वभूत्यै यतन्ते । न केन कश्च्त् परो ऽनुग्रहीतव्य इति मुहूर्तम् अप्य् अवतिष्ठते इत्य् अपि पूर्णकामः । 


[^१३७]:
     M G: kiṃcid

- अथ स्वार्थं प्रवृत्तस्य भक्षयितारम् अन्तरेण प्रवृत्तिर् अनर्थिका । तस्मिंस् तु सति फलवती । फलं च प्रयोजकम् । तच् च खादकाधीनम् इति पारंपर्येण खादकः प्रयोजक इति । 

- एवं तर्हि यो द्वेषाद् वध्यते स हन्तुः प्रयोजकः स्यात् । ततश् च हन्यमान एव हन्ता संपद्यते । न हि द्वेषेण विना हन्तृत्वोपपत्तिर् इति । तथा ब्रह्महत्यायाम् अपि सर्वस्वदानं[^१३८] पातकसंप्रयोजकम् । न हि प्रतिग्राहयितारम् अन्तरेण प्रतिग्रहोपपत्तिस् ततश् च प्रतिग्राही न केवलं प्रत्यवेयाद् अपि तु दातापि । रूपवती च स्त्री स्मरशरदह्यमानहृदयेन रागिणा दर्शितस्पृहातिशयेन शीलं रक्षन्ती प्रत्यवेयात् ।


[^१३८]:
     M G: sarvasvaṃ dadyāt

- तस्मान् नेदं प्रयोजकलक्षणम् । 

- तौ हि वधकखादकौ स्वार्थप्रवृत्तौ नष्टाश्वदग्धरथवद् इतरेतरोपकारम् अनुभवन्तौ, न पुनर् अन्यतरप्रयोजकौ[^१३९] । "शूद्रविट्क्षत्रविप्राणाम्" (म्ध् ८.१०४) इत्य् अत्र श्लोके निपुणम् एतन् निर्णीतम्[^१४०] ॥ ५.५१ ॥


[^१४०]:
     M G 1st ed.: nipuṇamennirṇītam


[^१३९]:
     M G: anyataraprayojakasmṛtiśaṅkayā ca
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When some one is killing an animal, if another person should come, and
for his own selfish purposes show his approbation, by such words as ‘he
is doing well in thus killing the animal,’—this latter man is called
the, ‘*approver*’.

‘*He who cuts*.’—he who quarters the dead body.

‘*He who* *serves*’—places it before persons eating.

‘*He who eats it*’.

All these are ‘*slayers*’.

What is meant by attributing the character of the ‘*slayer*’ to those
who do not actually *slay*, but do the other acts of eating, preparing,
selling, &c.,—is the deprecation of all these acts; all these persons do
not actually become ‘*slayers*.’ The ordinary act of ‘slaying’ is that
which results in loss of life: so that it is only one who does this act
that is the ‘slayer.’ In accordance with the rule that ‘the nominative
agent of an act is one who does it independently by himself,’ that
person alone is called the ‘slayer’ who deprives living beings of their
life; those who do the acts of buying, selling, etc., are other than
that person.

“But the statement that the approver and the rest also are *slayers*
also emanates from the *Smṛti* (and as such must be accepted as true).”

The authority of this *Smṛti* does not extend to the subject of words
and their denotations; it is confined to the subject of right and
wrong,—what is lawful and what unlawful. More authoritative on the
subject of words and their meanings is the revered Pāṇini. In fact Manu
and otther writers on *Smṛti* only make use of words in accordance with
ordinary usage, and they do not lay down rules bearing upon words and
their meanings; they use the words, they do not regulate them.

“But as a matter of fact, we do find these writers making such
assertions as ‘such and such a person is called a *Preceptor*’ and so
forth (which lay down the denotation of words).”

True; bat in such cases there is no inconsistency between what the
*Smṛti* says and what we learn from the treatises bearing upon the
subject. Nor again is there any other useful purpose found to be served
by those passages that explain the meaning of the term ‘preceptor’ (for
instance). In the present case, however the passage is capable of
serving an. auxiliary purpose by bring taken as a commendatory
statement; so that it is not possible, on the strength of the present
text alone, to regard all. these persons as ‘slayers.’

Some people argue as follows:—“If there is no one to *eat*, there would
be no one to kill; so that the *killing* is really prompted by the
*eating*; and the prompter of an act also has been regarded as its
*doer*; so that the *eater* is the *slayer*, even in the direct sense of
this term; and it is only right that the *eater* should have to perform
the same Expiatory Rite as the *slayer*.”

This, we say, is not right; because as a matter of fact, a different
expiatory rite has been prescribed, under Discourse XI for the *taster*
of the meat of the animals killed (by others).

What has been stated above regarding the *prompter* bring the *doer*,
that also is not true. The *prompting agent* has been thus defined—‘He
who by means of direction and request, prompts the independent agent, is
also an auxiliary agent, the other bring the principal one.’ And as a
matter of fact when the *slayer* kills the animal, hie is not ordered to
do so by the eater; be does it as u means of living, with the motive
that he shall live by selling the flesh.

If *prompting* means *abetting*,—*i.e*., if it be held that when a man
proceeds to do a certain act, if another person abets him and
co-operates with him, the latter is to be regarded as the
*prompter*—then, this definition also is not applicable to the present
case, in the act of *killing*, the ‘abetting’ would consist in such acts
as—(*a*) collecting the weapons, etc. (*b*) the sharpening of the
blunted axe, (*c*) the bringing up of the sword, and so forth; as
without these the act of *killing* could not be accomplished, \[and none
of these acts is done by the *eater* \].

If, however, the *prompter* be defined as ‘that person for whose take
the. work is done,’—then, in the case of the ‘teaching of the boy,’ the
boy would have to be regarded as the *prompting agent* in the act of
‘teaching’; and yet ‘teaching’ does not mean ‘reading’ (which is what
the boy actually does).

Then again, when the slayer does the *killing*, he does not do so for
the benefit of any particular person, by virtue of which the latter’s
action of *eating* could be regarded as sinful. In fact, all these
persons undertake these acts for their own benefit; and not one of them
is troubled by the idea of benefiting any other person.

“Even when the man undertakes the killing for his own benefit, such
action would be absolutely useless if there were no *eater*: it is only
when there is an *eater*, that the man’s action is fruitful; and the
*fruit* of an act is the motive, the ‘prompting force; and as this
depends upon the enter, the eater also is an indirect prompter.”

If this be so, then, when a person is murdered on account of enmity,
since the enemy would be the prompter of the act of killing, the
murdered man could become the murderer! For without enmity, the act of
murder would not be possible. Similarly when in the case of
Brāhmaṇa-murdcr, the murderer (in course of the Expiatory Rite) gives
away his entire property, the act of giving will have been prompted by
the *murder*: and as there could be no *recipient* without the giver, it
is not only the re-chastity, but the giver also that would beecome
tainted with the sin. Similarly a beautiful woman would incur sin by
guarding her chastity against the lover who has his heart burning with
the arrows of love and who has expressed his longing for her.

From all this it follows that what has been suggested cannot be the
definition of the *prompter*.

As a matter of fact, both the *slayer* and the *eater* do their
respective acts for their own special benefit: but they become helpful
to one another in the manner of two persons one of whom has lost his
horse and another his cart; and there can be no question of one being
the *prompter* of the other.

This has been fully discussed under 8.104.—(51).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

“In the *Mahābhārata* (13.114.36-49) this is ‘as told of old by
Mārkaṇḍeya’.”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 251)—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.181),
as describing the eight kinds of ‘killer’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p.
301), which has the following notes:—‘*ghātakāḥ*’, partakers in the
sin,—‘*anumantā*’, who acquiesces in the act,—‘*viśasitā*’, who cuts the
limbs,—‘*nihantā*’, who actually does the act that deprives the animal
of the life,—‘*saṃskartā*,’ who cooks the meat,—‘*upahartā*’, who serves
the meat.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

051	He who permits (the slaughter of an animal), he who cuts it up, he who kills it, he who buys or sells (meat), he who cooks it, he who serves it up, and he who eats it, (must all be considered as) the slayers (of the animal).
</details>
