+++
title = "056 न मांस-भक्षणे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There is no sin in the eating of meat, nor in wine, nor in sexual intercourse. Such is the natural way of living beings; but abstention is conducive to great rewards.—(56).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"प्राणस्यान्नम्" (म्ध् ५.२८) इत्य् अत आरभ्य यावद् अयं श्लोको ऽर्थवादसंघात एव । द्वित्राः श्लोका विधेयार्थाः[^१४३] । 


[^१४३]:
     M G: viṣayārthāḥ

- **न मांसभक्षणे दोषो** यथा "क्रीत्वा स्वयं वाप्य् उत्पाद्य" (म्ध् ५.३२) इति तथायम् अपि श्लोकः । **निवृत्तिस् तु महाफलेत्य्** एतद् अत्र श्रूयते । बहुभिर् निन्दार्थाकरैर् ईदृशः संस्कारो जातो यन् न किंचिन् मांसम् अशितव्यम् । भूतानां वृत्त्यर्थम् आह- **न मांसभक्षणे दोष** इति । देवार्चनशिष्टे ब्राह्मणकाम्यादिषु निमित्तेषु प्रागुक्तेषु न दोषः । किं तु यद्य् अशितुम्[^१४४] इच्छन्ति । निवृत्तिर् न भक्षयामीति संकपपूर्विका महाफला । फलविशेषाश्रुतेः स्वर्गः फलम् इति मीमांसकाः । 


[^१४४]:
     M G 1st ed.: kiṃcid aśitum

- एवं मद्ये क्षत्रियादीनाम्, मैथुने तु सर्ववर्णानाम्, दिवोदक्यापर्वकालाद् अन्यत्र । अल्पस्व् अल्पा प्रवृत्तिर् एषा शास्त्रीया । भूतानां शरीरस्थितिहेत्वर्था प्रवृत्तिः । तथा चायुर्वेदकृत् । 

- आहारो ब्रह्मचर्यं च निद्रा चेति त्रयं मतम् ।

- मादकं च स्त्रियश् चैव ह्य् उपस्तम्भनम् आयुषः ॥ इति ।

- यस् तु तेन विनापि शक्नोति जीवितुं तस्य **निवृत्तिर् महाफला** । प्रदर्शनार्थं चैतत् । अशिष्टाप्रतिषिद्धविषयाणाम् अन्यासाम् अपि निवृत्तीनाम् एवम् एव । यत्र विधानं पुरुषस्य प्रवर्तमानस्य प्रीत्यतिशयोत्पत्तिप्रयोजनम् अनिन्द्यम्, गर्हेत वा यतो निवृत्तिः फलाय, यथा मध्वशनं संपन्नभोजनं राङ्कवं परिधानम् इत्य् एवमादि । तथा च शिष्टसमाचारः । व्यासश् च भगवान् एवम् आह । ये तु संसक्तितो ऽशिष्टाप्रतिषिद्धा अपि यथा हसितकण्डूयनादयस् ततो निवृत्तिर् धर्माय ॥ ५.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From verse 28 to this we have a series of purely commendatory texts;
there are only two or three verses that are injunctive in their
character.

‘*There is no sin in the eating of meat*.’ This assertion stands on the
same footing as verse 32 above. What we learn from the present verse (in
addition to what we know already) is that ‘*abstention is conductive to
great rewards*.’ By various deprecatory texts the impression has been
produced that ‘no meat should be eaten.’ But by way of providing a means
of living for living beings it has been asserted that ‘*there is no sin
in the eating of meat*’; which means that there is no sin if one eats
such meat as is the remnant of the worship of Gods, etc., or what is
eaten at the wish of Brāhmaṇas, and under such similar circumstances
specified above; but this only if he wish to eat it.

‘*Abstention*’—taking the resolve not to eat meat and then to abstain
from it—this is ‘*conducive, to great reward*.’ In the absence of the
mention of any particular reward, *Heaven* is to be regarded as the
reward. So say the *Mīmāṃsakas*.

Similarly in regard, to ‘wine’, for the *Kṣatriyas*,—and to ‘*sexual
intercourse*’, for all castes; but apart from that which may be alone
(*a*) ‘during the day’ or (*b*) ‘with women in their courses’, or ‘on
sacred days’, (in connection with all of which sexual intercourse has
been forbidden).

The three things mentioned, here, in their very restricted forms,
constitute the ‘natural way of living beings’, sanctioned by the
scriptures with a view to the maintenance of the body. Says the author
of the Science of Medicine (*Āyurveda*)—‘Food, continence and
sleep—these three, intoxicants and women, tend to prolong life.’

If, however, one can manage to live without these, for him ‘*abstention
is conucive to great rewards*.’ This is said merely by way of
illustration: same being the case with all ‘abstentions’ from such
things as are neither prescribed nor forbidden. Where however a certain
act is definitely prescribed, there is nothing reprehensible in the
man’s doing it, even if it be done only for the Bake of the pleasure
that it affords him; in fact *abstention* from such an act would itself
be reprehensible, as done with a view to ‘great rewards’; *e.g*. the
eating of honey, having a full meal, wearing a woolen garment and so
forth. Such also is the practice of cultured people; the revered Vyāsa
also says the same. Those acts, on the other hand, to which people have
recourse only through desire,—even though these be neither permitted nor
forbidden,—*e.g*. laughing, scratching of the body and so
forth,—abstention born these would be conducive to great rewards,—(56)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 719) in support of
the view that it is only the eating of prohibited meat that is
sinful;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 537), which adds the
following notes:—‘*māṃse*’—*i.e*., such meat as is not
forbidden;—‘*madye*’—for the *Kṣatriya* and other lower castes
;—‘*maithune*’—*i.e*., such sexual intercourse as is not
prohibited;—‘*nivṛttiḥ*’—*i.e*., the determination to
renounce;—‘*mahāphalā*’—*i.e*., conducive to the attainment of Heaven
and such other results as have been mentioned in the foregoing
*arthavāda* passages. *Medhātithi* has remarked that the determination
to renounce meat and other things must be regarded as conducive to
Heaven only, on the basis of the principle of the Viśvajit
(*Mīmāṃsā-sūtra* 4.3.15-16). But this is not right, as it is very much
simpler to accept the rewards mentioned in the *arthavāda* passages as
the rewards meant here, rather than assume one on the basis of the said
principle.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 277), which remarks that this
refers, to such meat as is left, after the offerings to the gods and
Pitṛs have been made;—as regards wine, the abandoning of it is
‘conducive to great rewards’ only for those for whom wine is not
forbidden,—and as regards ‘sexual intercourse,’ the abandoning that
leads to great rewards is that of the intercourse which is sanctioned
‘on all except the sacred days,’ and ‘that for the sake of pleasure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

056	There is no sin in eating meat, in (drinking) spirituous liquor, and in carnal intercourse, for that is the natural way of created beings, but abstention brings great rewards.
</details>
