+++
title = "058 दन्त-जाते ऽनुजाते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a child dies that has teethed, or one younger than it when its tonsure has been performed, all its relatives are ‘impure’. The same is declared to be the case with births also.—(58).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अनुजातो** दन्तजाताद् बालतर इति स्मरन्ति । तथाविभागेनोद्देशमात्रम् इदं यतस् तदपेक्ष आशौचकालभेदो भविष्यति । तद् यथा स्मृत्यन्तरे "आ दन्तजन्मनः",[^१४५] तथा "बाले देशान्तरस्थे च" (म्ध् ५.७७) इत्यादिना सद्यःशौचं श्रुतम् । बाल अजातदन्तो विज्ञेयः । एवं च "नृणाम् अकृतचूडानाम्" (म्ध् ५.६६) इत्य् एतद् एकरात्रिकम् आशौचं दन्तजाते ऽप्य् अवस्थाप्यते । एवम् एते स्मृती[^१४६] विषयव्यवस्थया अविरोधिन्यौ बालविषये भवतः । नैशिकी च शुद्धिर् आ चूडाकरणात् । यतो निवृत्तमुण्डकानां त्रिरात्रं वक्ष्यति । तच् च त्रिरात्रं प्राग् उपनयनात् परतः "शुद्ध्येद् विप्रः" (म्ध् ५.८२) इत्यादि । 


[^१४६]:
     M G 1st ed.: smṛti


[^१४५]:
     This verse in YDh 3.23 in Vijñāneśvara.

- <u>ये तु</u> "दशाहं शावम् आशौचम्" (म्ध् ५.५९) इत्य् एतान् पक्षान् वयोविभागेन वर्णयन्ति, स्मृत्यन्तरात् समाचाराच् च व्युत्क्रमेण संबन्धयन्ति, दशाहम् उपनीतस्य अनुपनीतस्य चतुरहं कृतमुण्डस्य त्र्यहं जातदन्तस्यैकाहम् अनुजातस्य सद्यःशौचिकादयस् तु विकल्पाः । एवं त्र्यहचतुरहयोः कृतचूडस्य । 

- <u>तेषां</u> मते स्मृत्यन्तरप्रसिद्धो वृत्तस्वाध्यायापेक्षो न विकल्पः प्रतिपादितः स्यात् । तच्चोत्तरत्र दर्शयिष्यामः । 

- सर्वव्यापारनिवृत्त्या मृत उच्यते, संपूर्वस्य तिष्ठतेर् व्यापारोपरमदर्शनात् । **बान्धवाः** सपिण्डाः समानोदकाश् च । **सूतके च** पुत्रजन्मादौ । **तथोच्यते अशुद्धा बान्धवाः सर्व** इत्य् एतेनास्य संबन्धः ।

- <u>कथं</u> पुनर् अत्र वयोभेदप्रतिपत्तिर् यावता कृतमुण्ड इति संस्कारसंबन्धो गम्यते । कृतोपनयने चेत्य् अत्र श्रुतम् एव । अत एव कृतचौडः कियन्तं कालम् उच्यत इति नैव श्रूयते ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । दन्तजातानुजातसाहचर्यात्[^१४७] कृतमुण्डः काललक्षणार्थो विज्ञायते । स च कालो ऽत्र प्रथमतृतीयवर्षः[^१४८] । 


[^१४८]:
     M G 1st ed.: prathamatṛtīya ity eṣaḥ


[^१४७]:
     M G: dantajātānusāhacaryāt

- <u>यद्य्</u> अपि प्रथमे वर्षे वैकल्पिकं मुण्डीकरणं तस्मिन्त् समाश्रीयमाणे "आ दन्तजन्मनः सद्यः"[^१४९] इत्य् एतद् बाधितं भवति ।


[^१४९]:
     This verse in YDh 3.23 in Vijñāneśvara.

- <u>तद् अप्य्</u> अयुक्तम् । कियान् अवधिः **कृतमुण्ड** इति । **च**शब्दात् **कृतमुण्डे चे**ति कृतोपनयने चेति लब्यते, संस्कारान्तरप्राप्तौ व्यपदेशान्तरप्रवृत्तेः । एवं चैतया स्मृत्या एकवाक्यता भविष्यति "आ दन्तजन्मनः सद्यः"[^१५०] इत्य् अत्रापि । "त्रिरात्रम् आ व्रतादेशात्"[^१५१] इति व्रतादेशग्रहणं कालोपलक्षणार्थम् एव । न च ब्राह्मणस्यानित्यो ऽष्टमवर्षे एवं क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् यश् च कालः, तदा शूद्रस्य न कश्चित् काल उक्तः स्यात् । तत्राप्य् अतीतशैशवस्य "परिपूर्णं सर्वेषाम्" इतिवचनात् । अतश् च आ अष्टमाद् वर्षाद् ऊर्ध्वं चतुर्णाम् अपि वर्णानां सर्वाशौचम्, शूद्रस्यापि तस्य कालस्य सद्भावात् । यस्मिंस् तु पक्षे एकादशे वर्षे क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् उपनयनं लक्ष्यते तदा शूद्रस्य न कश्चित् काल उक्तः स्यात् । तत्राप्य् अतीतशैशवस्य परिपूर्णम्, अर्वाक् त्रिरात्रम् । शैशवस्य निवृत्तिश् च स्मृत्यन्तरे "प्राग् अष्टमाच् शिशुः प्रोक्तः", अन्यैस् तु " आ ष्ōडशाद् भवेद् बालः" इति । ये ऽपि षोडशाद् बाल्यनिवृत्तिम् आहुस् तेषाम् अप्य् अष्टमाद् ऊर्ध्वं मासिक्य् एव शुद्धिः । एवं पठ्यते "ऊर्ध्वं तु षड्भ्यो वर्षेभ्यः शुद्धिः शूद्रस्य मासिकी" । अन्यत्र पठितम् अष्टवर्षस्य मास इति । 


[^१५१]:
     This verse in YDh 3.23 in Vijñāneśvara.


[^१५०]:
     This verse in YDh 3.23 in Vijñāneśvara.

- <u>ननु</u> वक्ष्यमाणेभ्य एव वाक्येभ्य एषा वयोभेदव्यवस्था लभ्यते । किम् अनेन दन्तजात इत्य् उद्देशेन ।

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । सुखावबोधार्थम् ॥ ५.५८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Anujāta*’—is taken to mean *younger than the child that has*
*teethed*.

The present verse mentions the several stages only by way of
illustration, and much emphasis is not meant to be laid on them; since
the exact period of ‘impurity’ in regard to the various stages is going
to be prescribed later on; *e* .*g*., in another *Smṛti-text* we
read—(*a*) Till the appearance of teeth etc.’—(*b*) ‘When a child dies
in a foreign country, etc., etc.’ (5.77),—there is^(‘)*immediate
impurity*’;—where the term ‘child’ is to be understood as standing for
*one that has not teethed*. Thus too it. is that what the text (5.67)
says regarding the ‘one night’s impurity’ in connection with the death
of ‘persons whose tonsure has not been performed etc.’ is taken to be
applicable also to one who has teethed. It is in this way that the rules
laid down by the two *Smṛti-texts* in connection with the ‘child’ become
reconciled. In fact the ‘one night’s impurity’ pertains only to children
till the performance of the Tonsure; since in connection with those
whose Tonsure has been performed, the period of impurity is going to be
prescribed as to last for three days; and this applies to the case of
hoys before their Initiatory Ceremony; after which the period would be
ten days and so forth, as laid down in the text—‘The Brāhmaṇa is
purified in ten days, etc.’ (5.83).

Some people interpret the several alternative rules laid dowu in verses
5.59 *et* *seq*—‘Impurity due to death lasts for ten days’ etc.,
etc.,—as pertaining to the different ages (of the dying person), and
construe them differently from their natural order—on the strength of
usage and of other *Smṛti.texts*; by which (*a*) the impurity in
connection with the Initiated child lasts for ten days, (*b*) in
connection with the uninitiated for four days, (*c*) in connection with
one whose Tonsure has been performed, three days, (*d*) in connection
with one who has teethed, one day, and (*e*) in connection with younger
children, it is to be only ‘immediate’; and so forth. In this way there
would be an option between ‘three’ and ‘four’ days, in connection with
one whose Tonsure has been performed.

But in accordance with these views, there would be no notice taken of
the rule that has been prescribed in another *Smṛti-* text, in
connection with the death of the boy ‘who has completed his Vedic
Study’. All this we shall explain later on.

A person is called ‘dead’ when all his functions have ceased, and the
root ‘*sthā*’ with the prepositiou ‘*sam*,’ denotes *cessation of
functions*, \[Hence ‘*saṃsthita*’ means *de?a* \].

‘*Relations*’,—*i.e., Sapiṇḍas* (sharers in the ball-offering) and
*Samānodakas* (‘Sharers in the water-offering’).

‘*Jātaka*’ is the birth of a son, etc.

‘*The same is declared to be the case*’; *i.e*., all relations are
impure.

*Question*: “Whence is any notion of *age* obtained, by which the text
is interpreted as applying to one whose Tonsure has been performed, and
thus refering to a particular sacramental rite? In a later text, the
connection of the Initiatory Rite has been directly mentioned. But we do
not find it any where stated upto what age a child may be called
tonsured.”

Our answer to the above is as follows: By reason of its having been
mentioned along with ‘one who has teethed,’ the term ‘tonsure’ is
understood as indicating a definite age; and this age is to be taken as
extending upto the third or the fourth year.

It has been argued that—“Since there is the option of performing the
Tonsure during the first year, if one adopts this option, the present
rule (which extends the ‘impurity’ in the case of the^(‘)tonsured’ child
to one day) would be contrary to the rule that ‘upto the period of
teething, the impurity is only *immediate*’.”

This is not right. As a matter of fact, what is the extent of the
‘tonsured’ age we learn from the juxtaposition of the epithets ‘tonsure’
and ‘initiated’, which indicates that the new name becomes applicable
only upon the performance of the next sacramental rite \[so that the boy
could be regarded as ‘tonsured’ only till the performance of the
Initiatory Rite\]. In this way, the present text would become reconciled
with such texts as ‘Till teething, impurity is to be immediate.’
Similarly in the *Smṛti-* text—‘Till the ceremony of initiation it is to
be for three days’—the Initiatory ceremony is mentioned only as
indicative of a particular age. It might be argued that—“there would, in
this case be no age specified for the *Śūdra*, in the way in which it is
for the *Brāhmaṇa*, the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya*, in connection with
whom, the Initiation has been more or less strictly prescribed, as being
the eighth year and so forth.”—But in this case also, the age would be
understood as when the period of ‘childhood’ is passed; in accordance
with the law that ‘for all there is a full period of impurity.’ Thus
then, *after the eighth gear*, in case of all the four castes, the
period of impurity would be the full term’, and this age is applicable
to the case of the *Śūdra* also. In accordance with the view by which
the ‘Initiation’ in the present context is taken as indicating the
eleventh (and twelfth) year in the case of the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya,—there would be no age mentioned in connection with the *Śūdra*.
Though in his case also the period of impurity extends to the full time,
in the case of one who has passed his childhood; before which the period
extends to three days only: and the passing of childhood has been
defined in another *Smṛti-text*, which says—‘Upto the eighth year one is
called a *child*’, while others declare that ‘one is a *child* till his
sixteenth year.’ Those who hold that ‘childhood’ ceases after the
sixteenth year,—according to those also *purification* takes place only
after a month (the full term). It has also been declared that ‘after six
years, the purification of the Śūdra comes after a month’; and in
another text—‘one month in the case of the eight-year-old child’.

*Objection*—“The rules regarding the several ages are obtained from the
verses that follow; why then should the ‘teething’, etc., have been
specified in the present verse?”

*Answer*— True; but it bus been answered here also for the purpose of
making the rules more intelligible.—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anujāte*’—‘Younger than one that has teethed’ (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda; and Kullūka also, who is not
rightly represented by Buhler).

‘*Ca*’—This includes ‘one whose *Upanayana* has been performed’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 239), which adds that
according to this the impurity attaches, not only to the *Sapiṇḍas*, but
also to *Sagotras, Samānodakas*, paternal relations, maternal relations
and so forth;—‘*anujāta*,’ literally meaning ‘bora after,’ means ‘*one
born after* the *dantajāta*,’ this latter being the noun immediately
preceding the word;—the presence of ‘*ca*,’ implies the ‘initiated’
also; ‘*saṃsthīte*’ means ‘dead.’

It is quoted in *Hāralatā* (p. 1), which adds the following
notes:—‘*anujāta*’ is the child born after the child that has cut its
teeth, *i.e*., a ehilçl that has not cut its teeth,—‘*kṛtacūḍe ca*,’ the
‘*ca*’ is meant to include one whose Upanayana has been
performed,—‘*saṃsthite*’ on his dying,—‘*sūtaka*’ stands here for the
impurity *due to birth*, that *duo to death* having been separately
mentioned.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Parāśara* (3.21).—(Same as Manu.)

*Āpastamba* (2.15.3.4).—‘On account of the death of children who have
not completed their first year, the parents alone shall bathe—and those
who bury them.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.26-31).—In the case of the child dying immediately after
birth, or one who is still-born, the impurity of the family ceases
immediately; for such a child there is no cremation, nor
water-oblations; in that of a child that has teethed hut whose tonsure
has not been performed, the impurity lasts for a day and night; in that
of one whose tonsure has been done, hut no other sacrament, three days.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.18.23).—‘Impurity due to death lasts for three or ten
days; if the dead is a child less than two years old, the impurity
attaches to the parents only; and that due to the birth attaches to the
mother only. In the case of the death of children before teething, the
impurity is only for the moment; in that of those after teething but
before tonsure, it lasts for one night; in that of those after tonsure,
hut before Upanayana, for three days;—after that, for ten days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

058	When (a child) dies that has teethed, or that before teething has received (the sacrament of) the tonsure (Kudakarana) or (of the initiation), all relatives (become) impure, and on the birth (of a child) the same (rule) is prescribed.
</details>
