+++
title = "059 दशाहं शावम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among ‘Sapiṇḍas’. the period of impurity due to death is ordained to last for ten days; or till the collecting of the bones, or for three days, or for one day only—(59).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सापिण्ड्यलक्षणं वक्ष्यते । **अर्वाक् संचयनाद्** इति चतुरहोपलक्षणं वक्ष्यति । "आहिताग्नेः संचयनं चतुर्थ्याम्" इति वचनम् अस्ति । अयं च विकल्पो वृत्तस्वाध्यायापेक्षो वृत्तापेक्षो वा । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम् ।

- एकाहाद् ब्राह्मणः शुद्धो यस् तु ब्रह्माग्निसंयुतः ।

- त्र्यहात् केवलवेदस् तु निर्गुणो दशभिर् दिनैः ॥

तत्र त्रिवेदस्याग्निमत एकाहः । द्विवेदस्य तु त्र्यहम् । निर्गुणस्य दशाहम् । गौतमेन (ग्ध् १४.४४) पठितं सद्यः शौचम् । तच् च विशेष एव ब्राह्मणस्य स्वाध्यायानिवृत्त्यर्थम् । तत्र क्रियान्तराणि- 

- उभयत्र दशाहानि कुलस्यान्नं न भुज्यते ।

- दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः स्वाध्यायश् च निवर्तते ॥ 

इत्याद्याः क्रिया निवर्तन्ते । केवलं बहुवेदस्यागुण्यमानं प्रणश्यतीति स्वाध्यायो न निवर्तते । 

- तथा वृत्त्यपेक्षो युक्तो विकल्पः । षट्कर्मजीविनो दशाहः, त्रिबिर् अन्य इत्य् अस्य चतुरहः, द्वाभ्याम् एक इत्य् अस्य त्र्यहः । दाशाहिक आशौचे प्रतिग्रहादाव् अनधिकारात् प्राणयात्रैव दुर्लभा । 

- <u>ये तु</u> "वयांसि चत्वारि, चत्वारश् चाशौचकालाः, अतो यथावयो यथासंख्येन संबन्धः," तेषां दन्तजाते दशाहः प्राप्नोति, उपनीते तु मृते एकाह एव । 

- <u>तत्र</u> स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचारविरोधः । 

- <u>अथ</u> विरोधपरिहारार्थं प्रातिलोम्येन संबन्धः क्रियते । "उपनीते दशाहः कृतमुण्डे चतुरहः त्र्यहो दन्तजाते एकाहो ऽनुजात" इति । 

- <u>अत्रापि</u> "निवृत्तचौडकानां त्रिरात्रात्" इति विरोधेन विकल्पो युक्तः, स्वशब्देन त्रिरात्रस्यानुविधानात्, चतुरहस्य वृत्तिभेदेन संचयभेदेन विषयत्वसिद्धेः । स्मृत्यन्त्रेणैवम् एकवाक्यता भवति एकाहाद् इत्यनेन । अन्यथा वयोभेदेन विकल्पे व्याख्यायमाने वृत्तस्वाध्यायापेक्षो मानवे शास्त्रे केन विकल्पो लभ्यते ।

- अतो गौतमवचनाद् यस्य प्रात्यहिकेन प्रतिग्रहेण विनापि वृत्तिर् अस्ति कुसूलधान्यादेस् तस्य बहुस्वाध्यायस्य स्वाध्यायाध्ययनमात्रे सद्यःशुद्धिः । ये ऽपि त्र्यहदयः कल्पास् तत्रापि त्र्यहैहिकादीनां तावन्मात्र एव विशुद्धिर् वृत्त्यर्थे प्रतिग्रहे ऽनेनैव गौतमदर्शनेन । अन्यथा ब्राह्मणस्य स्वाध्यायिन इत्य् एवावक्ष्यत् न स्वाध्यायानिवृत्त्यर्थम् इति । 

- अतो यद्य् अप्य् अविशेषेणैकाहाच् छुद्धिर् इत्यादि श्रुतम्, तथापि नियतक्रियाविषयं विज्ञ्ēयम् । येन नित्यवद् ब्राह्मणस्य दशाहम् आह "शुद्ध्येद् विप्रो दशाहेन" इति (म्ध् ५.८२) । न ह्य् अन्यत् पुनर्वचने प्रयोजनम् अस्ति । तस्माद् विकल्पो ऽयं युक्तेन मार्गेण व्याख्येयः । यत्र पुनर् बालादौ सद्यःशौचम्, निवृत्तमुण्डकादौ त्रिरात्रम्, तत्र विकल्पाभावात् सर्वक्रियासु शुचित्वम् ॥ ५.५९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The qualifications of the^(‘)*Sapiṇḍa*’ shall be described later on.

‘*Till the collecting of the bones*’;—this is meant to indicate the
period of *four days*;—since there is the text—‘The bone-collecting of
one who has set up the fire shall be done on the fourth day’.

The alternatives here laid down are in consideration of the man’s
character and Vedic learning, or of his character only; as says another
*Smṛti* -text,—‘The Brāhmaṇa who is equipped with the Veda only, in
three days, and he who has no qualifications, in ten days.’ The period
of ‘one day’ is meant for the man who knows *three Vedas* and has set up
the Fire; that of ‘three days’ far one who knows *one Veda* only; and
that of ten days for one who has no such qualifications.

Gautama (14.44) has spoken of ‘immediate purity.’ But this is for a
special purpose; all that is meant it that Vedic Study shall not cease.
During the period of Impurity, several acts are discontinued,—*e.g*. for
ten days, the food of the two families is not eaten; the making of
gifts, the receiving of them, the offering af (of?) oblations and Vedic
Study are discontinued; so that ordinarily all these acts would cease
during the period; but so far as the Student of several Vedas is
concerned, if he were not to repeat them regularly, he would forget
them; hence in his case Vedic Study shall not cease.

Similarly it is only right that an alternative should be provided, in
consideration of the mourner’s livelihood. For instance, for the man who
lives by the ‘six acts’ (of giving and receiving gifts, of sacrificing
and officiating at sacrifices, and Reading and Teaching), the impurity
lasts for ten days; for him who lives by the ‘three acts’ (of receiving
gifts, officiating at Sacrifices and Teaching), it lasts for four days,
and for him who lives by’two acts,’ it lasts for three days. If, for all
these, the Impurity were to last for ten days, then, as the man would
not be entitled to receive gifts and officiate at sacrifices, his living
would become extremely difficult for him.

Some people hold that—“there are four age-stages, and four periods of
Impurity; so that each of the latter is to be taken along with each of
the former.”

But according to this view, there would be ten days impurity in the case
of the child that has teethed; while in the case of the death of the
initiated boy, it would be for a single day only; and this would be
contrary to usage and other Smṛti-texts.

In order to avoid this incongruity, the connection may be made in the
reverse order; *i.e*., the death of the *initiated* boy entailing *ten*
days, and that of the *tonsured* child four days, the *teething* child
three days, and a still younger child only one day.

Even so in view of the incompatibility (of this view) with the
Smṛti-text, that—‘in the case of the *tonsured* child, the impurity
lasts for three days’,—it would be necessary to regard the two (three
and four days) as optional alternatives; specially as the term ‘*sva*’
refers to ‘three days,’ and the period of^(‘)four days’ would apply to
the particular livelihood of the mourner, or to the particular day on
which the bones are collected. In this manner all this becomes
reconciled with the other Smṛti-texts, which, speaks of^(‘)one day, &c,’
If, on the other hand, the option were explained as based upon the
diversity of age,—then, with what would Menu’s declaration
regarding^(‘)conduct’ and^(‘)study’ be taken as optional?

From all this it follows that on the strength of Gautama’s assertion,
there is to be^(‘)immediate purification,’ only so far as Vedic Study is
concerned—for the man who, like the person possessing a ^(‘)granary’,
has other means of living than the receiving of gifts, and who is very
much learned in the Vedas. In the case of the other alternatives, of
‘three days’ and the rest, the purification in meant simply to qualify
the man for the receiving of gifts for purposes of a living. This is
according to the view of Gautama. If this were not his meaning, then, he
would have said simply—‘for the Brāhmaṇa learning the Veda,’—and not
‘for the purpose of avoiding discontinuance of study.’

Thus, though purification has been laid down in a general way, as to be
accomplished in a single day,—yet it should be understood as pertaining
to certain special acts only. So that the ordinary period for the
Brāhmaṇa being^(‘)ten days’ (according to 5.83), there is no need for
saying anything else; from which it is clear that the option should be
admitted in the manner described above. In the case however of ‘purity’
being immediate, in the case of new born infants, and the period of
impurity lasting for ‘three days’ in the case of tonsured
children,—sinece there is no option, the purity must pertain to all
acts.—(59).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“The commentators are of the opinion that the length of the period of
the impurity depends on the status of the mourner; and that a man who
knows the mantras only of one *Śākhā* shall be impure during four days,
one who knows a whole *Śākhā* (or two Vedas) during three days, one who
knows the Veda (or three Vedas) and keeps three or five sacred fires,
during one day. Medhātithi however mentions another interpretation,
according to which the four periods correspond to the four ages of the
deceased, which have been mentioned in the preceding verse. According to
this view, the Sapiṇḍas shall mourn for an initiated person for ten
days,—for one who had received the tonsure, four days, and so
forth.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 893), which explains the first
half to mean that the *Sapiṇḍas* are impure for ten days, and the second
half as laying down three other alternatives;—‘*Arvāk* (or as it reads
*ā vā*) *sañcayanāt asthnām*’ it explains as indicating the period of
*four days*, the fourth day being prescribed for the collecting of the
bones of the dead. Thus the four alternative periods are—ten days, four
days, three days and one day; and the rule regarding the restriction of
one or the other is thus laid down by *Parāśara*—‘The Brāhmaṇa equipped
with both the Veda and the Fire becomes pure in *one* day, one equipped
with the Veda only in *three* days, and one without qualifications in
ten days.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.29), which remarks that the four
periods here specified are meant respectively for the
‘*Kusūladhānyaka*,’ the ‘*Kumbhīdhānyaka*,’ the *Tryahaihika*’ and the
‘*Aśvastanika*’ (described in 4.7 above). It quotes Parāśara’s rule
(just quoted), but rejects it as unacceptable.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 391), and again on p. 426;—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (pp. 226 and 229);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 116);—in
*Hāralatā* (p. 3) which reads ‘*āsthi*’ and explains it as meaning ‘four
days’;—and in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p. 37).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.1).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* become impure by death during ten
days,—except those who officiate as priests, who have performed the
initiatory sacrifice and religious students.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.1).—‘Referring to deaths and births, they declare
that the impurity of *Sapiṇḍas* lasts for ten days, except for the
officiating priest, or one who has performed the initiatory sacrifice,
or the religious student.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.16).—‘It is ordained that impurity caused by a death shall
last ten days in the case of *Sapiṇḍa* relations.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.1).—‘Impurity due to death and birth shall last for ten days
for the Brāhmaṇa, among Sapiṇḍas.’ *Yājñavalkya* (3.18).—(See above,
under 58.)

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.4.18).—‘For ten days after the death of a
Sapiṇḍa (study and gifts are to be avoided).’

*Śāṅkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.7.6).—‘If a death or birth has occurred, for
ten days (shall study be discontinued).’

*Parāśara* (Aparārka, p. 894).—‘The Brāhmaṇa equipped with fire and Veda
becomes purified in a single day; one endowed with the Veda only, in
three days; one devoid of special qualifications, in ten days.’

*Dakṣa* (Do.).—‘There are options in regard to impurity due to birth—for
the moment, for one, three, four, six, ten, twelve or fifteen days, for
a month, and till death. No such impurity attaches to the persons who
know the text and the meaning of the Veda, along with the subsidiary
sciences, rituals and esoteric doctrines, and are also devoted to the
performance of religious rites.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity when Vedic Study is carried on,
when Homa is offered at both times and when the Vaiśvadeva-offerings are
constantly made. The Brāhmaṇa equipped with Fire and Veda becomes
purified in one day; those with lesser qualifications, in three and four
days. One without the Fire, in three days; the common Brāhmaṇa, in ten
days; one who lives upon pickings and gleanings is immediately purified;
for one whose sole possession is the *Gāyatrī* and who duly offers the
three twilight-prayers, and who does not live the life of the dog, the
impurity lasts for six days.’

Parāśara (Do.).—(Same as above; but ‘*Mahābhārata is read*’ in place
‘*Homa is offered at both times*).’

*Dakṣa* (Do. p. 895).—‘The twice-born man who takes his food without
bathing or making oblations, is always impure; also one who is an
invalid, a miser, one in debt, one devoid of religious acts, and
illiterate, one who is controlled by his wife and so forth.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 895).—‘The man who has a second wife is
beset with permanent impurity.’

*Śātātapa* (Do.).—‘One who is degraded in birth and death, who is devoid
of twilight-prayers, and who only bears the name of the *Brāhmaṇa*,
becomes pure in ten days.’

*Parāśara* (l.3.6.).—(Same as above.)

(Do.) (1.3.7, etc.).—‘Those who arc of the same Piṇḍa are affected by
impurity. Up to the fourth grade, the impurity lasts ten days; at the
fifth grade, six days; at the sixth, four days; at the seventh, three
days.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 583).—‘On the death of the Brāhmaṇa,
the Śūdra, the Vaiśya and the Kṣatriya are purified in ten days.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘On the death of the Brāhmaṇa, all his Sapiṇḍa relations
are impure for ten days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

059	It is ordained (that) among Sapindas the impurity on account of a death (shall last) ten days, (or) until the bones have been collected, (or) three days or one day only.
</details>
