+++
title = "062 सर्वेषां शावम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus also should it be at a birth; but the parturient disability attaches to the parents only; or, the parturient disability would attach to the mother alone, and the father would become purified by bathing.—(61)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एवम्** एतत् सपिण्डानां **जनने** । यथैव दशाहादयः कल्पाः षट्कर्मादिवृत्त्यपेक्षया स्वाध्यायाल्पमहत्वापेक्षया च व्यवस्थिता मरणे, तथैव **जनने ऽप्य्** आशौचमात्रम् अतिदिश्यते कालानवच्छिन्नम् । सामर्थ्याच् चागृह्यमाणविशेषतया तत्संबन्धसकललाभः । कालावच्छिन्नातिदेशे तु एकेनैव मुख्यत्वाद् दशाहेन संबन्धः स्वाध्यायादिष्व् स्यात् । यदि वा पाठप्रत्यासत्त्या[^१६४] दशाहाद्यपेक्षया एकाहेन एकेनैव[^१६५] च निराकांक्षीकृतत्वाद् अन्यैस् त्र्यहादिभिर् न संबन्धः स्यात् । तत्रेयं स्मृतिर् अविशेषेण वृत्तस्वाध्यायापेक्षायां व्यवस्थायां मृतसूतकयोर् विदधती, जनने गुणाद्यनपेक्षया जातिमात्रे स्थाप्यमाना, विरुध्येत[^१६६] । समाचारश् च बाधितः स्यात् ।


[^१६६]:
     M G 1st ed.: virudhyate


[^१६५]:
     M G 1st ed.: śakyenaiva


[^१६४]:
     M G 1st ed.: svādhyāyādiṣv apāṭhaprattyāsattyā

- <u>ननु</u> एवं स्त्रीणाम् अपि त्र्यहैकाहादयः कल्पाः सूतिकानां प्राप्नुवन्ति समाचारविरोधिनः । 

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । यद्य् अयं विकल्पः स्यात् तद् एवम्[^१६७] । व्यवस्थित एवासीत् कल्पः । तथा हि **तु**शब्द उपपन्नतरो भवति । 


[^१६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: eva

- **सूतक**शब्दश् च नाशौचे वर्तते । लक्षणया सूतकसंबन्ध्य् अशौचं लक्षयेत् । लक्षणायाः साहचर्याद् अस्पृश्यतैव लक्षयितुं युक्ता । यदि च सर्वम् आशौचम् अभिप्रेतं स्याद् आशौचग्रहणम् एवाकरिष्यत् "अशौचं मातुर् एव" इति । अतश् च स्मृत्यन्तरे त्रिरात्रम् अस्पृश्यतोक्त्या इह तदभावस् तयोर् विकल्पः **सूतकं मातुर् एव** । मातापित्रोर् मातुर् एवेति पितुर् विकल्पः । **उपस्पृश्य** स्नात्वा **शुचिर् भवतीति** । उपक्रममात्रम् इदं वक्ष्यमाणेन श्लोकेन पितुर् अपि त्र्यहम् एव ॥ ५.६१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The same rule holds good regarding ‘*birth*’ among *Sapiṇḍas*. Just as
in connection with death several alternative periods of impurity have
been laid doom, in consideration of one’s livelihood depending upon the
six acts (of giving and receiving gifts and so forth), and also upon the
vastness or purity of one’s Vedic learning,—exactly the same holds good
regarding cases of birth also; all that is meant to be applicable to the
case of birth is *impurity* pure and simple, without any qualification
of time; so that no specifications being found to be indicated here, the
case of birth, through its own inherent aptitude, becomes connected with
all that has been said (in the way of qualifications and limitations) in
connection with *death*. On the other hand, if the words of the text
were taken to indicate the application, to the case of birth, of
impurity as specially limited by a particular period of time, then it
would be connected only with the period of ten days, which is the
principal alternative laid down; and in that case this same period would
apply to the case of Vedic Study &c. also. Or, by the closer proximity
of the mention of the alternative of the single-day-period, the case of
birth would become connected with this latter period only; and thus
having its wants supplied by this, it would have no connection with the
other alternative periods of ‘three days’ and the rest. And in that
case, even in the face of the limitations and restrictions due to
livelihood and study, the present text would lay down the same single
alternative in connection with both death and birth, and would,
irrespective of all qualifications of the persons concerned, become
conditioned by their caste only, and thus become incongruous and opposed
to usage.

“Under this explanation, the alternative periods of *three days* and the
rest would become applicable also to the women that have been delivered;
and this would be contrary to all usage.”

The answer to this is as follows:—This would be the case only if what is
laid down in the present verse (regarding the delivered woman) were an
optional alternative. As a matter of fact however, the rule laid down is
absolutely fixed. It is only thus that the use of the term *tu* “*but*”
becomes justified.

Then again, the term ‘*sūtaka*’ used in the text does not directly
denote *impurity*; it could only indirectly *indicate* the *impurity as
related to parturition* (which is what is directly express sed by the
word). But through indirect indication it would be far more reasonable
to make it express *untouchability*, which is more nearly related to
parturition. If all kinds of impurity were meant, then the author would
have used the word ‘*āśauca*’ ‘impurity’, itself; and the line would
have read ‘*āśaucam mātureva syāt*.’ From all this it follows that
another *Smṛti-text* having laid down three days (for both parents), and
the present text making no mention of any such period, what is here said
regarding the ‘parturient disabiliy’ attaching ‘to the mother only’ is
an optional alternative. So that between the father and the mother the
option applies to the father only.

The father becomes pure after having bathed. This is only by way of a
piefatory (prefatory?) statement; from what follows in the next verse
the father also remains untouchable for *three days*. (61).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Medhātithi and Govindarāja omit the first line of 61 and the first line
of 62; so that in the place of 61 and 62, they read only one verse made
up of the second lines of both 61 and 62.

This verse is quoted in *Hāralāta*, (p. 15), which explains ‘*evameva*’
as standing for ‘ten days’ and other periods;—and in *Śuddhimayūkha*,
(p. 37).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.14).—‘The rules regarding impurity caused by death of a
relation are applicable to that caused by the birth of a child also;—in
this case, the impurity falls on the parents,—or on the mother alone.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.1).—‘Referring to births and deaths, they declare
that the impurity of Sapiṇḍas lasts ten days.’

Do. (1.11. 19-23).—‘On a birth indeed, the parents become impure for ten
days; some declare that the mother alone becomes impure, because people
avoid only lying-inwomen; others say that the father alone becomes
impure, because the semen is the chief cause, the Veda speaking of sons
born without mothers. Hut the correct opinion is that both the parents
become impure, because they are equally connected with the event.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.20-22).—‘The rule regarding impurity should bo exactly the
same on the birth of a child, for those men who desire complete
purity,—or for the mother and the father alone; according to some for
the mother only; they quote the following text:—“On the birth of a
child, the male does not become impure, if he does not touch the
female.”’

*Parāśara* (3.31).—(Same as Manu.)

*Yājñavalkya* (3.10).—‘The impurity (on birth) attaches to the parents;
but most certainly and completely to the mother. On the day of the birth
however there is no impurity; since on that day the ancestors are born.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 896).—There is no impurity for the male, if he
has no contact with the female.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

062	(Or while) the impurity on account of a death is common to all (Sapindas), that caused by a birth (falls) on the parents alone; (or) it shall fall on the mother alone, and the father shall become pure by bathing;
</details>
