+++
title = "063 निरस्य तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The man, having emitted semen becomes pure by bathing; hence, on account of seminal filiation he should observe impurity for these days.—(62)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सहेतुकं त्र्यहम् उपदिशन्न् अपस्पर्शनशुद्धिं पूर्वोक्ताम् अनुमन्यते । किम् अर्थम् उच्यत इति चेत्, सरूपविधितयार्थवादार्थम्, न विधेयतया "जर्तिलयवाग्वा वा जुहुयात्" (त्स् ५.४.३.२) इतिवत्[^१६८] ।


[^१६८]:
     On this example, see Śabara on PMS 10.8.7.

- **निरस्य तु शुक्रं** मैथुनधर्मेण संप्रयुज्य शुक्रोत्सर्गाद् अनन्तरं **उपस्पृश्य** स्नात्वा शुचिर् भवति । अतो **बैजिकाद् अभिसंबन्धात्** । बीजनिमित्तो **बैहिकः** । **अभिसंबन्धः** अपत्योत्पत्तिः । अतस् तत्र कथं **नानुरुन्ध्यान्** नानुवर्तेत । **अघम्** आशौचं **त्र्यहम्** । यादृशं च शुक्रनिरसनेन अकृतस्नानस्याशुचित्वम्, न तादृशम् एव प्रसवे, अपि तु त्र्यहम् । पूर्वश्लोकार्धत्र्यहशेषतयानूद्यते । अत एवोपस्पृश्येति स्नानम् उच्यते, "स्नानं मैथुनिनः स्मृतम्" इति वचनान् नाचमनम् । 

- <u>पुत्रे तु</u> जाते तदहः स्पृश्यतैवेति केचित् । तथा च शंख आह- "कुमारप्रसवे नाड्याम् अच्छिन्नयां गुडतिलहिरण्यवस्त्रप्रावरणगोधान्यप्रतिग्रहेष्व् अदोषस् तदहर् इत्य् एके" । 

- तस्मात् स दिवसः पुण्यः पितॄणां प्रीतिवर्धनः । 

- स्मरणाच् चैव पूर्वेषां तदहर् न प्रदुष्यति ॥ इति ।

तथा श्राद्धम् अप्य् एके कुर्वन्तीति च । अनेन पितुः सर्वथाशौचाभाव एव । 

- तत्रैते स्मृती पूर्ववद् वृत्तिसदसद्भावापेक्षया विकल्प्येते[^१६९] ॥ ५.६२ ॥


[^१६९]:
     M G 1st ed.: vikalpete
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

While laying down purification after three days, the author permits the
purification by bathing, which has been spoken of above. If it be
asked—“why should this be stated?”—the answer is that it is stated in
the form an injunction; by way of a commendatory assertion, and not a
regular injunction, just as in the case of the Vedic passage
‘*jartilayavāgvā va juhuyāt*

‘*Having thrown out semen*’,—after emission daring the act of sexual
intercourse,—the man becomes pure by bathing.

‘*Hence, on account of seminal filiation*’;—‘*Seminal*’ means
*pertaining to the semen*;—*fitiliation* means *begetting of the child*;
and in the event of this, why should he not ‘*observe*’— keep up—‘*the
impurity for three days*.’ The impurity due to child-birth is not of the
same kind as that which attaches to the man who has emitted semen and
has not taken a bath; in fact it lasts for three days. The period of
‘three days’ mentioned here is a reiteration of the same as occurring in
the preceding verse. For this same reason the ‘*upaspṛśya*’ in the
present verse is taken to mean *bathing* and not merely *water-sipping*;
specially in view of the assertion that ‘*s??na*, ‘birthing,’ has been
enjoined for the man who has had *sexual* intercourse.

Some people hold that when a son is born to a man, he becomes touchable
on that same day. As says Śaṅkha—At the birth of a boy, before the
placenta has been severed, there is nothing wrong in the man receiving,
on that same day, the gift of sugar, sesamum, gold, cloth, clothes, cows
and grain,—so say some: and again—‘for this reason that day is sacred,
enhancing as it does the pleasure of the forefathers: and because it
reminds one of his ancestors, there is no impurity attaching to that
day.’ In fact some people-even go to the length of performing *śrāddhas*
on that day. From this it follows that in such cases there is no
impurity attaching to the father at all.

In fact the two *Smṛti-* texts just quoted are to be taken as providing
optional alternatives, in consideration of the man having, or not
having, means of living (other than the receiving of gifts).—(62).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 63 of other commentators.)

According to the interpretation of Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda, the two halves of this verse are distinct, the first half
laying down that the man who emits semen is purified by bathing, and the
second half that he who begets a child is purified after three days.
According to Medhātithi however, the first half supplies the reason for
what is asserted in the second half. (See *Translation*).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 606), which
explains ‘*baijika-sambandha*’ as ‘*janyajanakabhāva*,’ ‘the parental
relationship.’

The *Hāralatā*, which has both lines of (62) explains the meaning
as—‘The untouchability due to death pertains to all *sapiṇḍas*, and that
due to birth pertains to the parents of the child only, but the full
period (ten days) of ‘impurity’ attaches to the mother only, that
attaching to the father disappears immediately on bathing.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

063	But a man, having spent his strength, is purified merely by bathing; after begetting a child (on a remarried female), he shall retain the impurity during three days.
</details>
