+++
title = "066 रात्रिभिर् मास-तुल्याभिर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of miscarriage, the woman becomes pure in so mamy days as there have been months; and the woman in her courses becomes fit by bathing after the ceasing of the menstrual flow.—(65)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गर्भस्रावे** गर्भमाससमा रात्रीः स्त्रिया एव शुद्धिर् युक्ता, इह वाक्ये तस्याः श्रुतत्वात् । सपिण्डानां तु स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचाराव् अन्वेषणीयौ । वसिष्ठेन तु सपिण्डानां त्र्यहः समाम्नातः- "ऊनदिवर्षे प्रेते गर्भपतने सपिण्डानां त्रिरात्रम् अशौचम्" (वध् ४.३४) । स्रावस् तु गर्भस्य मासत्रयाद् ऊर्ध्वं प्राग् दशमान् मासात् । <u>केचित्</u> तु प्राङ् नवमाद् इत्य् आहुः । अप्राप्तकालस्य पातः स्राव उच्यते । न पुनर् द्रवरूपस्यैव । तथा गौतमेन गर्भस्रंसने "गर्भमाससमा रात्रीः" इति पठितम् (ग्ध् १४.१७) । सप्तमास्याश् च जीवन्ति । अतः सप्तमे मासे पूर्णम् आशौचम् । एतत् तु जीवतो जातस्य युक्तम् अन्यथा तु गर्भमाससमा इत्य् एव । 

- इह रजस्वलाया रजस्य् उपरते स्नानेन शुद्धिर् आम्नाता । स्मृत्यन्तरे त्र्यहाद् ऊर्ध्वम् । तत्रैवं व्यवस्था । प्राक् त्र्यहाद् रजोनिवृत्ताव् अपि नास्ति शुद्धिर् ऊर्ध्वम् अनुपरते ऽपि भवति । किं तु **विशुद्ध्यतीति** । प्रकृते पुनः **साध्वीति** वचनाद् अनिवृत्ते रजसि वैदिककर्माधिकारानुप्रवेशो नास्ति, न पुनः स्पर्शादिनिषेधः । उत्क्तम् "आद्याश् चतस्रो निन्दिताः" (म्ध् ३.४७) इति । **रजस्वला स्त्री रजस्य् उपरते स्नानेन साध्वी** भवति शुद्धा कर्मयोग्येत्य् एवं पदयोजना । स्त्रीग्रहणं वर्णमात्रस्त्र्यर्थम् । पूर्वे तु श्लोका ब्राह्मणविषया व्याख्यातास् तदाशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थं स्त्रीग्रहणम् । उत्तरत्रापि यत्र विशेषप्रमाणं नास्ति तत्रापि वर्णमात्रविषयतयैव, यथा "नृणाम् अकृतमुण्डानाम्" (म्ध् ५.६६) इति ॥ ५.६५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of miscarriage, the purification, that comes after as many
days as the months of pregnancy, can pertain only to the woman: us it is
the *woman* that is directly spoken of in the verse. The rule for the
purification, in this case, of her Sapiṇḍa-relation has to be sought
from other *Smṛtis* and from usage. Vaśiṣṭha (4. 34) however has laid
down the period of *three days* for all Sapiṇḍas—‘In the case of the
death of a child less than two years old, and also in the case of
miscarriage, the impurity lasts for three days.’

It is regarded as a case of ‘miscarriage,’ when it happens after three
months and before the tenth month; others hold that it is to be so
regarded when it happens before the ninth month. What is called
‘*srāva*’ (*lit*. *flowing out*) here is *discharge* *before the right*
*time*, and not necessarily the *flowing* *out* of a liquid substance.

In connection with miscarriage, Gautama also has declared that ‘the
period lasts for as many days as there have been months’ (14-15).

As a matter of fact, children born in the seventh month live; hence if
miscarriage takes place in the seventh month, the period of impurity is
full (ten days). But this is so only if the child is born alive;
otherwise it is to be as many days as there have been months.

For the woman in her courses it has been ordained that she is purified
by bathing after the flow has ceased; while another Smṛti text says that
she becomes pure in *three days*. On this point the final conclusion is
as follows: ‘Before three days, even though the flow may cease, she is
not pure; while after three days she becomes pure even though the flow
may not have ceased.’ In the text however, though the term used first is
‘becomes pure’, we find word ‘*fit*’ (*sādhvī*) used in connection with
the menstruating woman; and this means that so long as the flow has not
ceased, she is not *fit* for participating in the Vedic rites; and it
does not mean that she is *untouchable*; as it has been declared that
‘the first four days have been condemned.’ The construction thus is—‘The
woman in her courses, on the ceasing of the flow, by bathing, becomes
fit’—*i.e*., fit for participating in religious rites.

The term ‘woman’ has been used with a view to include women of all
castes; the foregoing verses having been explained as applying to the
Brāhmaṇa. The text has used the term ‘woman’ in this verse with a view
to guard against the idea that what is here laid down also applies to
the Brāhmaṇa only. In the following verses also, where there is nothing
to indicate the restriction of a rule to any particular caste, it is to
be understood as applying to all castes; as for instance, the next verse
which speaks of ‘persons whose tonsure has not been performed.’—(65).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 66 of other commentators.)

“Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda think that this rule refers to miscarriages
which happen during the first six months of pregnancy; and that from the
seventh month, whether the child lives or not, the full period of
impurity must he kept. Nārāyaṇa moreover asserts that in the first and
second months the impurity shall last three
days”.—Buhler.—‘*Sādhvī*’.—‘Becomes pure’ (Medhātithi and
Kullūka);—‘chaste’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.20), which explains the second
half to mean as follows:—‘The woman in her courses becomes pure—*i.e*.,
fit for religious functions—on bathing *after the cessation of the
menstrual flow*; but as regards touchability, she becomes fit for it by
bathing on the fourth day, even though the flow may not have ceased
entirely.

The verse is quoted also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 369);—in *Śuddhikaumudī*
(p. 3);—in *Hāralatā* (p. 68), which says that, the plural number in
‘*rātribhiḥ*’ indicates that miscarriage is a source of purity only when
it occurs in the third and subsequent months of the pregnancy, and that
the mention of the ‘woman’ in the second line makes it clear that the
impurity due to miscarriage also attaches to the wife only, and not to
the husband;—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 25a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.17-18).—‘For miscarriage the impurity lasts for a number
of days, equal to the number of months from conception;—or for three
days.’

*Baudhāyana*, (1.11.31).—‘On miscarriage, the female remains impure for
as many days as months that may have elapsed since conception.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.72).—‘The woman in her courses becomes pure by bathing, on
the fourth day.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘On miscarriage, purification is brought about by
the lapse of as many nights as the months (that may have elapsed since
conception).’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘If there is miscarriage within six
months of conception, then purification is brought about by the lapse of
days equal in number to that of the months; after six months the
purification follows the ordinary rule of the caste. For the *Sapiṇḍas*,
the purification is immediate.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On the death of a child less than two
years old and on miscarriage, the *Sapiṇḍas* are impure for three days.’

*Marīci* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On miscarriage, for the Brāhmaṇa, the
impurity lasts three days; for the Kṣatriya, four days; for the Vaiśya,
five days, and for the Śūdra eight days. On miscarriage, the mother
herself remains impure in accordance with the number of months, while
the father and others remain impure for three days.’

*Vṛddha-Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On miscarriage, the woman herself
is impure for as many days as the number of months; the man is purified
by simple bathing; but after three days if the pregnancy had advanced.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘Till the fourth month the miscarriage
is called “*Srāva*,” *Flowing out*; during the fifth and sixth months,
it is called “*Pāta*” *Falling out*; after that it is “*Prasūti*,”
*child-birth*; and the impurity due to this last lasts for four days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

066	(A woman) is purified on a miscarriage in as many (days and) nights as months (elapsed after conception), and a menstruating female becomes pure by bathing after the menstrual secretion has ceased (to flow).
</details>
