+++
title = "072 स्त्रीणाम् असंस्कृतानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of women whose sacramentary rite has not been performed, the marital relations become pure after three days; and their paternal relations also become pure according to the rule prescribed before—(71).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**असंस्कृता** या वाङ्मात्रेण प्रतिगृहीता न च विवाहितास् तासां मरणे **बान्धवाः** पतिपक्षास् त्रिरात्रेण । **सनाभयस् तु** सपिण्डाः स्वपितृपक्षा यथोक्तेन कल्पेन "निर्वृत्तचौडकानाम्"[^१७२] (च्ड़्। म्ध् ५.६६) इति जातेर् अधिकारात् त्रिरात्रेण । 


[^१७२]:
     M G: nivṛtta-

- <u>अन्यैस् तूकम्</u> "सोदर्या दशरात्रेण" इति । तेषां चाभिप्रायः । अष्टवर्षायाः कन्याया दानं विहितम् । अदत्तायाश् च निर्वृत्तचौडकव्यपदेशाभावात्[^१७३] पुंस इवोपनीतस्य, तदानीं कल्पान्तरस्यानाम्नानाद् दशाह एव युक्तः । 


[^१७३]:
     M G: nivṛtta-

- <u>अन्यैस्</u> तु पठितम् "अहस् त्व् अदत्तकन्यासु बालेषु च विशोधनम्" इति । तत्र व्याख्यातारः पञ्चदशाब्ददेशीयापि या ह्य् अदत्ता कन्या तिष्ठेत् तदहर् एवाशौचम् ।[^१७४] मुख्यम् आम्नानम् अतिक्रम्य कालक्षपणे प्रमाणाभावात् ।


[^१७४]:
     M G 1st ed. add: yato

- <u>तत्रोच्यते</u> । "बालेषु च" इति को ऽस्यार्थः । यावता उक्तम् एव योगविभागे "आ दन्तजन्मनः सद्यः" इति । न चैतेन तद् बाधितुं युक्तम्, सामान्यरूपत्वाद् अस्य, तस्य च विशेषव्यवस्थापनरूपत्वात् । अतो ऽयम् एकाहः पृथग् उक्तो ऽपि आ चूडाद् एव व्यवतिष्ठते, सामान्यस्य विशेषापेक्षत्वात् । तस्माद् अनार्ष एवायम् अर्धश्लोकः प्रतिपद्यते- स्पर्शविषयतया नेयः । स्पर्शप्रतिषेधो हि मृतकसूतकयोर् बालस्यापि पुंवत् प्राप्तः । तदर्थम् एतद् उक्तं स्यात् "अहस् त्व् अदत्तकन्यासु बालेषु च विशोधनम्" इति । एवं च विषयसप्तम्याश्रिता भवति । सा च युक्ता कारकविभक्तित्वात् । इतरथा अध्याहृत्य भावलक्षणा सप्तमी व्याख्यायेत, "बालेषु मृतेषु जीवतां शुद्धिः" इति । न च तदुपस्पर्शनाद् आशौचम् एतेनैतत् सिद्ध्यतीति । विषयान्तरे तस्य च चरितार्थत्वात्, भूमौ परिवृतत्वात्, भूमौ परिवृतस्य च स्पर्शनसंभवात् । 

- <u>अविशेषोक्तौ</u> कुतो विशेषप्रतिपत्तिर् इति चेत् । 

- <u>तस्याचमनकल्पो</u> विद्यत इत्य् एतत् संनिधौ तादृशस्यैव[^१७५] स्पर्शस्य प्रतीयमानत्वात् । तथा च रजस्वलास्पृष्टिनो बालस्य स्पर्शनं नेच्छन्ति । अथास्य विशेषणं स्यात् । तथा गौतमेन तद् उक्तं स्वस्यां स्मृतौ (च्ड़्। ग्ध् १४.४४) । युक्तम् एवाधातुम् एतस्य । तस्माद् युक्तैवाधानकाललक्षणा ॥ ५.७१ ॥


[^१७५]:
     M G: tādṛśasyeva
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Whose sacramentary rite has been performed*;’—*i.e*, those who have
been accepted verbally, but have not been actually married; at the death
of such women, their^(‘)*marital relations*’—on her husband’s side, &c.,
&c.

‘*Their paternal relations*’—on the father’s side—are
purified^(‘)*according to the rule prescribed before*’—in verse 66;
*i.e*., in three days; this rule being laid down with reference to a
particular caste.

Others have explained the second half as referring to the rule that
‘uterine brothers and sisters are purified in ten days’ (the word
‘*sanābhi*’ being taken to mean ‘uterine’). The view of these persons is
as follows:—It has been laid down that a girl should be given away in
her eighth year: so that one who has teen given away is not. spoken of
as ‘one whose tonsure has teen performed’,—just as the ‘initiated boy’
is not so spoken of; and in as much as no other rule has been laid down,
the only right course to adopt is to observe the impurity tor *ten
days*.

Others again have read (the second half) as—^(‘)*ahastvadatta-kanyāsu
bālāsu ca vishodhanam*’; and people have explained this to mean that,
even in the case of a girl that remains unmarried till she is nearly
fifteen years old, the impurity shall last for one day only; and this on
the ground that there is no justification for rejecting the direct
injunction and observing a longer period of impurity.

Our answer to this is as follows:—What is the use of the expression
‘*bālāsu ca*’, when it has been already asserted that^(‘)upto the
appearance of teeth, the purity is immediate’? It is not right to have
this assertion set aside by the present later declaration: because the
present declaration is a general one, while the former is more
specialised. Hence the ‘one day’ rule, even though laid down, can only
be taken as referring to children till the performance of their Tonsure;
specially as a general statement is always dependent upon (and
controlled by) particular ones. For these reasons the suggested reading
of the second half of the verse must be rejected as not. emanating from
the sage. But it may be taken as refering to *touchability*. There is
un-touchability due to the birth or death of a child, exactly as in the
case of grown up men; and it is only with reference to this that there
could be the assertion that—^(‘)there is purity (*i.e*., touch-ability)
after one day in the case of unmarried girls and young children,
(*i.e*., these become touchable in one day)’; and it is in this sense
that the Locative ending (in ‘*bālāsu*’ and ‘*kanyāsu*’) be comes
justified as being the correct one: since it is a regular case-ending.
If the words were taken in any other sense (*e.g*., as meaning^(‘)at the
death of girls and hoys, &c.’), it would be necessary to have elliptical
construction and to take the Locative ending in the^(‘)absolute’
sense:—‘girls and hoys having died, the purity of those living comes
about after one day’; and we could not get at the sense that the
impurity spoken of results from the touching of the dead; specially as
the former (the seme obtained by construing the line as Locative
Absolute) has its sphere of application elsewhere, in the ease of burial
under-ground; and no *touching* is possible in the case of the body
being placed under the ground.

“Since the assertion is a general one, wherefore is it restricted to a
particular case.’”?.

As a matter of fact, we find a rule regarding the *sipping of water* in
the same connection; and in connection with this, it is only the said
kind of *hatch* that is possible. It is for this reason that people do
not consider it desirable to touch the child that has touched a
menstruating woman; and this may be regarded as the qualifying factor in
the present case; is has been declared by Gautama in his Smṛti; it is
only right for such a person to set up the fire; hence it is only right
that it should be taken as pointing to the time of setting up the
fire.—(71).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 72 of other commentators.)

‘*Yathoktena kalpena*’—‘According to the rule declared in verse 67’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Nandana);—‘just like the husband’s
relatives, *i.e*., after three days’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 907), which supplies the
following explanation:—In the case of ‘*asaṃskṛta*’—*i.e*.,
unmarried—women, the ‘*bāndhavas*’—*i.e*., their relations on the
husband’s side—become pure in three days; but their *sanābhayaḥ*—*i.e*.,
relations on the father’s side—become pure according to the aforesaid
rule. It is because the relations on the father’s side are separately
mentioned by means of the word ‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ that the generic term
‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ is taken in the special sense of ‘relations on the
husband’s side’. But there can be no such relations in the case of
*unmarried* women; hence the women meant here must be those that have
been verbally betrothed, but not yet formally married.—‘*Sanābhayaḥ*,’
the relations on the father’s side, are purified according to the rule
that has been laid down in connection with the death of a boy before
*Upanayana*,—*i.e*., the impurity ceases after three days. The analogy
between the two cases is based upon the principle that for women
‘marriage’ takes the place of the *Upanayana*; so that the *unmarried
girl* stands on the same footing as the *uninitiated boy*.

The verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.24), to the effect that in the
case of girls who have been betrothed, but not married, the relations on
the father’s side are purified in three days. Here also ‘*bāndhava*’ and
‘*sanābhi*’ are explained as in *Aparārka*; and it is added that the
‘ten-days’ rule could not be rightly applied before marriage.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 608), in the same sense,
and ‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ is explained as *patisapiṇḍāḥ*, and ‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ as
‘*pitṛsapiṇḍāḥ*’,—and *yathoktena kalpena* as the ‘three days’ rule’.

It is also quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 264) in the sense that in the
case of girls that have been betrothed, but whose marriage-rites have
not been. performed, the *sapiṇḍas* of her husband are purified in three
days, while the *sapiṇḍas* of her father are purified by the said rule,
*i.e*., by the rule declared in the first half of the verse. It adds
that ‘betrothal’ must be a necessary condition, as before that the
unmarried girl win have no relations ‘on the husband’s side’; and that
her father’s *sapiṇḍas* to only three degrees are meant, because of the
express declaration of Vaśiṣṭha that ‘for unmarried girls the
*sapiṇḍa-relationship* extends to only three degrees.’

This is quoted in *Hāralatā* (p. 49), whieh adds the following
notes:—‘*Asaṃskṛtānām*,’ unmarried,—‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ relations on the
husband’s side—‘*yathoktena*,’ as described in the first line of the
verse, *i.e*., they are purified in three days;—the first half refers to
the girl dying after betrothal, as before betrothal, the girl can have
no ‘relations on the husband’s side’; her ‘*sanābhayaḥ*,’ *i.e*.,
relations on her father’s side, also become pure in three days.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.8).—(Same as Manu.)

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.4.23).—‘Three days after the death of married
female relations.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.23).—‘On the death of girls not given away,
purification is attained in one day.’

*Vṛddha-Manu* (Aparārka, p. 908).—‘On the death of girls not given away,
purification is attained in one day; on that of those given away, in
three days.’

*Marīci* (Do.).—‘In the case of the death of girls,—prior to tonsure,
the purification is immediate; before betrothal, it is obtained in one
day; after betrothal, before marriage, in three days.’

*Pulastya* (Aparārka, p. 908).—‘In the case of girls not grown up, one
becomes pure in one day; in that of one betrothed, in one night along
with the preceding and following days; and in that of one altogether
given away, in three days.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘If a girl who has been given away dies in her
father’s house, her relations become purified in one day, but her father
in three days; if a girl dies after birth and before her tonsure, the
purification is immediate for all castes; if she dies after tonsure and
before betrothal, it is attained in one day; after betrothal, in three
days.’

*Marīci* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 608).—‘The girl that has been offered
without, water, and not actually given away, is to he regarded as
*unmarried*; and in the event of her death, the impurity lasts for three
days for her relations on both sides. In the case of girls, betrothed or
not betrothed, married or not married, the impurity for parents lasts
three days, and for others according to rule.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

072	(On the death) of females (betrothed but) not married (the bridegroom and his) relatives are purified after three days, and the paternal relatives become pure according to the same rule.
</details>
