+++
title = "073 अ-क्षार-लवणान्नाः स्युर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For three days they should eat food free from salines and salts, should bathe, should not eat meat-food and should sleep apart on the ground.—(72).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**क्षारलवणम्**[^१७६] । यवक्षारादि क्षारम् । लवणं सैन्धवादि । तन् न भुञ्जीरन् । लवनविसेषणं वा क्षारग्रहणं तेन सैन्धवस्य प्रतिषेधः । निमज्जनं च नदीतडागादाव् अतीर्थस्नानम्[^१७७] अङ्गपरिघर्षणादिवर्जनम् । **मांसाशनं** **च** यावद् आशौचं स्मृत्यन्तरात् प्रतिषिध्यते । एवं पठ्यते "न स्त्रियम् उपेयुर् न मार्जयेयुर् न मांसम् अश्नीयुः" । गृह्यकारस् तु "त्र्यहम् अनश्नन्त आसीरन् क्रीतोत्पन्नेन वा वर्तेरन्" (च्ड़्। आश्ग् ४.४.१५) इत्य् आह । **शयीरंश् च** स्थण्डिले परसङ्गवर्जम् । सूतके ऽपि ब्रह्मचर्यं स्मृत्यन्तरे प्रदर्शितम् ॥ ५.७२ ॥


[^१७७]:
     M G: nadītaḍāgādau ca tīrthasnānam


[^१७६]:
     M G add: ca
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Salines and salts*.’—The term^(‘)*salines*’ stands for nitrate of
potash and such substances, and^(‘)*salts*’ for rock-salt and other
salts. These they should not eat.

Or, the term ‘*saline*’, ‘*kṣāra*’, may be taken as qualifying,
‘*lavaṇa*’, ‘salt.’ In that case the prohibition (applying to only
*saline salts*) would not apply to rock-salt.

The ‘bathing’ laid down is to be done in a river or a tank or such other
reservoirs of water as are not regarded as specially ‘sacred’; and it is
to be done without scrubbing the body.

‘*Meat-food*’—is prohibited during the period of impurity, on the basis
of other *Smṛti* texts; where we read—‘They shall not have recourse to
women, they shall not scrub their body and they shall not eat meat.’ The
*Gṛhyasūtra* however says—‘For three days they shall remain without
food, or still live upon food obtained by purchase.’

‘*Should sleep*’—upon the bare platform, without company.

Another Smṛti-text has prescribed abstention from sexual intercourse
during impurity due to *births* also.—(72).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 73 of other commentators.)

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 885);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on
3.16);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 415);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 224) as
laying down restrictions for the *sapiṇḍas* of the dead;—in
*Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 142), which has the following notes:—‘*Tryaham*,’ on
the third, seventh and ninth days they should all bathe together, for
the benefit of the dead; all the *sapiṇḍas* should not eat meat during
the period of impurity,—‘*Kṣitau*’, this forbids sleeping on beds;—and
in *Hāralatā* (p. 157), whieh explains ‘*Kṣāralavaṇa*’ as ‘all salts
with the exception of *saindhava* and *sāmbhari*,’—‘they should all
bathe together on the third, seventh and ninth days.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.37-39).—‘During the period of impurity, they shall sleep
and sit on the ground and remain chaste; they shall not clean
themselves; nor shall they eat moat until the offerings have been made’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.21).—When a death has occurred, they
shall............ sit during four days on mats, eating food that does
not contain condiments or salt.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.7-9).—‘Diśevelling their hair and covering themselves
with dust,...stopping into the river, they throw up water for the dead
once and then, ascending the bank, sit down; this they repeat thrice.
They pour out water......... return to the village without looking back,
and perform those rites for the dead which women declare to he
necessary.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.16).—‘Eating food got by purchase or got without
asking, they shall sleep separately on the ground; and shall offer to
the dead food, according to the *Piṇḍayajña* rites, for three days.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.4.14).—‘Let them not cook food during that
night; let them subsist on bought or readymade food; let them eat no
saline food for three days,’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.11-15).—‘After having burnt the body, the relations enter
the water without looking back. Facing the south, they shall pour out
water with both hands on those days that are marked by odd numbers.
After they have gone home they shall sit during the other days, on mats,
fasting. If they are unable to do this, they shall subsist on food
bought in the market or given unasked.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 885).—‘For one day there should he fasting,
or they should eat what is obtained unasked.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Do.).—‘They shall eat what is bought or obtained unasked,
and remain calm; they shall eat no meat; nor have recourse to women.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Having bathed, they offer water to the dead for
three days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

073	Let (mourners) eat food without factitious salt, bathe during three days, abstain from meat, and sleep separate on the ground.
</details>
