+++
title = "079 अन्तर्-दशाहे स्याताम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, within ten days, another birth or death happen to befall, the Brāhmaṇa shall remain impure until that period of ten days shall have elapsed.—(78).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्रापि **दशाह**ग्रणम् आशौचकालोपलक्षणार्थम् । यस्य य आशौचकालस् तस्मिन्न् अनिवृत्ते यदि पुनर् अन्यद् आशौचनिमित्तम् उत्पद्यते तदा पूर्वशेषेणैव शुद्धिर् न त्व् अन्तरा निपतितं यत् तदीयाद् अह्नः प्रभृति दशाहादिगणना कर्तव्या । तथा च गौतमः- "तच् चेद् अन्तः पुनर् आपतेत् तच्छेषेण शुद्ध्येयुः" इति (ग्ध् १४.६) । **मरणजन्मनी** इति समासे यत्नम् अन्तरेण क्रमाप्रतिपत्तेर् व्यन्तरेणाप्य् उपनिपातप्राप्तौ[^१८१] समाचारात् समानजातीय एवेति द्रष्टव्यम् । **पुनः**शब्दश् च समानजातीयापेक्षया समर्थतरो भवति । **विप्र**ग्रहणम् अप्य् आशौचिनाम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । स्मृत्यन्तरे तु विहितम्- "रात्रिशेषे द्वाभ्याम्, प्रभाते तिसृभिः" (ग्ध् १४.७–८) इति । "एतस्य ब्राह्मणस्य प्रेतस्पर्शे दशरात्रम् आशौचम्" इति प्रकृत्य "न चेद् अन्तरा म्रियेत जायेत वा शिष्टैर् एव दिवसैः शुद्ध्येत" इतीयं स्मृतिः समानजातीयासमानजातीयभेदं नानुमन्यते ॥ ५.७८ ॥


[^१८१]:
     M G 1st ed.L upanipātanaprāptau
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Here also the mention of ‘ten days’ is meant to stand for the period of
impurity ordained in each individual case. The meaning thus is
that—‘before the expiry of the period of impurity ordained for a
particular ease, if another cause of impurity should come about, then
purification comes with the lapse of the remainder of that period; and
the second period of impurity is not to be counted from the day on which
the cause shall have arisen.’ Says Gautama (14.5)—‘If an impurity should
occur again during the interval, the purification comes with the
remainder of the former.’

‘Birth and Death’ being mentioned in a compound,—and it being not easy
to find out in which order of sequence these are to be taken,—and
intervention being possible by unlike causes of impurity also,—it is to
be understood, on the authority of usage, that what is meant is
intervention by a *like* cause of impurity (*i.e*. of impurity due to
death by another due to death and so forth). It is in this sense that
the use of the term ‘another’ becomes more justifiably significant.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ also is meant to stand for *persons observing the
impurity*.

In another *Smṛti-text* it has been laid down that—‘if it happens at the
close of the night, then it is in two days; and if it happens at dawn,
then three days’; and having begun with the statement—‘when the Brāhmaṇa
dies, the impurity lasts for ten days’,—it goes on to say—‘if no one
dies or is born in the interval, he becomes pure after the remaining
days.’ And this takes no account of any distinction between like and
unlike sources of impurity.—(78).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 79 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 386), which notes that the
period of ‘ten days’ here mentioned stands for all periods of impurity
as laid down in the several cases,—and not for that of ‘ten days’
only;—and again on p. 388.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 622);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II,
p. 237), in the sense that when there is a commingling of two causes of
impurity, the later one lapses with the earlier;—again on p. 244 to the
same effect—*i*. *e*., the period of impurity due to a later cause
becomes contracted within the limits of that due to a previous
cause;—and again on p. 247 to the same effect;—and in *Hāralatā* (p.
61), which says that the qualification ‘*punaḥ*’, ‘again’ applies to
*death* only, and draws the following conclusion:—‘If during the ten
days of impurity duetto a death, another death or a birth should occur,
then the impurity ceases after the end of the said ten days due to the
former death;’ it goes on to say. that such is not. the case if *death*
occur during the period of impurity due to a *birth*, as the impurity
due to death is more serious than that due to birth, and hence cannot
merge into the latter.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.6).—‘If during a period of impurity, another death occurs,
the relatives shall he pure after the lapse of the remainder of the
former period.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.17-18).—‘If a birth and a death occur together, one
and the same period of ten days shall serve for both. If other births or
deaths happen before the completion of the ten days of the first
impurity, that first period will suffice; provided the new course of
impurity occurs before the end of the ninth day.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.23-25).—‘If during a period of impurity, another death or
birth occurs, the relatives shall be pure after the expiry of the
remainder of that first period. But if one night only of the first
period of impurity remain, they shall be pure after two days and nights.
If the second death or birth occurs on the morning of the day on which
the first period expires, they shall he pure after three days and
nights.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.35-38).—‘If during the period of impurity due to birth,
another birth occurs, then purification comes after the expiry of the
first period of impurity. If the second occurs when only one night
remains of the first period, then purification comes after two days. If
it occurs on the morning of the last day of the first period, then after
three days. Similarly on the death of a relative during the period of
impurity due to death.

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘If another birth or death happen during a period
of impurity, one becomes purified on the lapse of the remaining daws.’

*Aṅgiras* (Aparārka, p. 898).—If during a period of impurity due to
birth, a death occurs,—or during a period of impurity due to death, a
birth occurs,—then, the impurity is to he observed in accordance with
the death, not with the birth.’

*Ṣaṭtṛṃśan-mata* (Do.).—‘If during an impurity due to death, a birth
occurs, then purification from the impurity duo to the birth comes after
the lapse of the period of impurity due to death; the birth is not
purificatory of the impurity due to death.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 899).—‘When two equal causes of impurity
coalesce, the impurity should cease with the former; if they are not
equal, then with the second; such is the declaration of Dharmarāja.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do., p. 900).—‘If after the mother’s death the father dies,
then purification comes after the lapse of the impurity due to the
father’s death.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘If a cause happens lengthening the period of an impurity,
the impurity should cease with what happens later. If during a three-day
period of impurity, a ten-day impurity should occur, then purification
comes with the end of this latter.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 900).—‘If an impurity due to death occurs during
an impurity due to death, purification comes with the lapse of the
previous impurity. A shorter impurity can remove another only when the
latter is a short one.’

*Prajāpati* (Do.).—‘If a son happen to be born during an impurity due to
another birth, then the father’s purification is immediate; he being
purified by the lapse of the previous impurity. When several impurities
coalesce, purification comes on the lapse of that which is the more
serious; when there is coalescence of impurity due to birth and another
due to death, that due to death is the more serious.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘There are two parts to every period of impurity;
if a fresh cause of impurity happen within the first part of a previous
impurity, then the purification comes on the lapse of the previous
impurity; if however it happen after that, then it comes on the lapse of
the second impurity. Similarly when during the impurity duo to one
death, another death happens. If during the impurity due to death, a
birth occurs,—or during the impurity due to birth, a death occurs,—then
purification comes on the lapse of the impurity duo to death.’

*Uśanas* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 622).—‘If during a shorter impurity, a
longer one happens, the purification cannot come with the lapse of the
former; it must take its own time.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘When circumstances prolonging the impurity occur,
purification comes on the lapse of the succeeding one; but if the second
impurity occurs before the fifth day of the first one, then purification
comes on the lapse of the first one.’

*Parāśara* (3.28-29).—‘If during the ten days of impurity, another birth
or death should occur, the Brāhmaṇa shall remain impure till the expiry
of those ten days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

079	If within the ten days (of impurity) another birth or death happens, a Brahmana shall remain impure only until the (first) period of ten days has expired.
</details>
