+++
title = "081 श्रोत्रिये तूपसम्पन्ने"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of a learned companion, one shall remain impure for three days; in the case of a maternal uncle, a pupil, an officiating priest and relation, for a night along with the two days (preceding and following it).—(80).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वेदशाखाध्यायी **श्रोत्रियः** । **उपसंपन्नः** मैत्र्या प्रयोजनेन वा केनचित् संगतः शीलेन युक्तो वा । पूर्वं तु सब्रह्मचारिण्य् एकाहम् अगृहीतवेदे दृष्टम् (म्ध् ५.७०) । अभिधानकोशे तु उपसंपन्नो मृतपर्यायः । बहुकालत्वाद् आशौचस्य पूर्वैव व्याख्या ज्यायसी । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> "**श्रोत्रिये मातुले त्रिरात्रम्**" इत्य् एव संबन्धन्ति, **पक्षिणीं रात्रिम्** इति शिष्यादिभिः । 

- **बान्धवाः** श्यालकमातृष्वस्रेयादयः[^१८२] । यदा तु "**मातुले पक्षिणीम्**" इति संबन्धस्, तदा मातुले[^१८३] बान्धवत्वाद् एव सिद्धा पक्षिणी । पुनर्वचनं नित्यार्थम् । तेनान्येषु बान्धवेषु यथाकामम् ॥ ५.८० ॥


[^१८३]:
     M G: mātula-


[^१८२]:
     M G: śālaka-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Learned*’—Who has studied the Vedic text.

‘*Companion*’—who, through friendship, has been living with one. Or
‘*upasampanna*’ may mean *endowed with good character*.

What has been said before (Verse 70) regarding the case of
‘fellow-students’ pertains to those who have not yet got up the entire
Veda.

In lexicons the term ‘*upasampanna*’ appears as a synonym for ‘dead’;
but in view of the long period of impurity laid down (which would not be
compatible with the case of a *stranger*), the former explanation is the
better of the two.

Others construe the text otherwise—explaining it to mean that ‘the
impurity lasts for three clays in the case of the *learned maternal
uncle*’ and ‘for a night along with the two days in the case of the
pupil, etc.’

The term ‘*relation*’ stands for the wife’s brother, the son of the
maternal aunt and so forth.

When we connect the ‘maternal uncle’ with^(‘)the night along with the
two days’,—then, since this period would be already applicable to the
case of the maternal uncle by reason of his being a ‘*relation*’, the
separate mention of him should he taken as making the rule compulsory in
his case; and this would mean that in the case of other *relations*, it
would be discretionary.—(80)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 81 of others.)

‘*Upasampanne*’—(a) ‘who lives with one out of friendship or on
business’ or (b) ‘endowed with good character’ (Medhātithi);—(c)
‘neighbour’ (Nārāyaṇa);—(d) ‘dead’ (suggested but rejected by
Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.24), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Upasampanna*’ means either ‘related by friendship or
neighbourliness’ or ‘possessed of good character’;—the ‘*mātula*’
includes the maternal cousin and other relations of that kind, and the
‘*bāndhava*’ stands for one’s own ‘*bāndhava*’ as also those of his
father and mother;—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 129), which explains
‘*npasampanna*’ as ‘living in one’s own house’, *i.e*., if a Vedic
scholar living in one’s house happens to die etc.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 610), which explains
‘*Śrotriya*’ as standing for one who has learnt the same rescensional
text as the person himself,—‘*Upasampanna*’ as one who is endowed with
friendliness or neighbourliness;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 431), as laying
down the rule relating to the case of the highly qualified *Śrotriya*,
or such near relations as the maternal uncle and the like; it explains
‘*upasampanna*’ as one endowed with friendliness or with good
qualities;—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 76), which adds the explanation:—‘on
the death of a Vedic Scholar belonging to another family in one’s own
house,—or on that of a Vedic Scholar who is *a near* *neighbour*
(‘*upasampanna*’) etc.’—and in the case of the mother’s uterine brother,
if the death takes place in another place, the impurity lasts for two
days and one night,—‘*Śiṣya*’, one who, though initiated by some one
else, has learnt, from one a portion of the Veda, or the subsidiary
sciences—in this case also the impurity lasts for two days and one
night,—‘*ṛtvik*’ one who has officiated at one’s sacrifices,—‘bāndhava’,
blood relation.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.20, 22).—‘The impurity lasts for a night along with the
preceding and following days, on the death of a relative who is not a
*Sapiṇḍa*, or a relative by marriage, or a fellow-student; for one day,
on the death of a *Śrotriya* dwelling in the same house.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11-29, 30).—‘For three days, on the death of an
officiating priest; of a pupil, of one who has the same spiritual guide,
of a fellow-student, three days, one day and night, one day and so
forth.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.44).—‘he becomes pure in one day, on the death of the wife
or son of his Teacher, or on that of his Subteacher, or his maternal
uncle, or his father-in-law, or a brother-in-law, or a fellow-student,
or a pupil.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.24).—‘For one day, on the death of the *guru*, a pupil,
an Exponent, a maternal uncle, or a Vedic scholar.’

*Pracetas* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 610).—‘On the death of the mother’s
sister, the maternal uncle, the father-in-law, the mother-in-law, the
*guru*, the officiating priest and the person for whom one
officiates,—purification is obtained in three days.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

081	For a Srotriya who resides with (him out of affection), a man shall be impure for three days; for a maternal uncle, a pupil, an officiating priest, or a maternal relative, for one night together with the preceding and following days.
</details>
