+++
title = "082 प्रेते राजनि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On the death of the King in whose realm he lives, it lasts till the light; in the case of a non-learned teacher, for the whole day; as also in the case of the (ordinary) teacher.—(81).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**राज**शब्दो ऽयम् अभिषेकादिगुणयोगिनि वर्णमात्रे लक्षणया वर्तते । यत आह **यस्य स्याद् विषये स्थितः** । जातिविशेषावच्छिन्नविषयेश्वरवचनत्वे लक्षणा, न च शब्दार्थः । **सज्योतिः** । सह ज्योतिषा वर्तते । दिवा प्रेते दिवैव, रात्रौ तु तन् नास्ति । एवं रात्रौ रात्रिर् एव नाहः । इदम् एव ज्ञापकम् अन्यत्र रात्रिग्रहणे ऽहर्ग्रहणे ऽप्य् अहोरात्रप्रतिपत्तेः[^१८४] । यथा "रात्रिभिर् मासतुल्याभिः" (म्ध् ५.६५), "त्र्यहम् एकाहम्" (म्ध् ५.५९) इति । "अह्ना चैकेन" (म्ध् ५.६३) इत्य् अत्र तु रात्रिग्रहणं पादपूरणार्थम् । रात्राव् अग्निर् **ज्योतिः** । एवं ह्य् अग्निहोत्रब्राह्मणे "अग्निना वै तेजसा तेजस्विन्य् आदित्येन तेजसा न[^१८५] भवति" (च्ड़्। ऐत्ब् २५.४) ।


[^१८५]:
     M G omit: na


[^१८४]:
     M G: ahorātri-

- **अश्रोत्रिये** अवेदाध्यायिनि, **अनूचाने** कृत्स्नम् अहः । रात्रौ न भवत्य् एव, उत्पन्ने ऽपि रात्रौ निमित्ते । 

- <u>कथं</u> पुनर् अश्रोत्रिये ऽनूचाने । एवं हि स्मर्यते "प्रवचने साङ्गे ऽधीतीति" ।

- <u>सत्यं</u> प्रवक्ताप्य् अनूचान उच्यते । तेनैवं कथंचिद् अङ्गादिग्रन्थार्थान्यः प्रवक्ति तस्मिन्न् अयम् अहर् विधिः । उपसंपन्ने च[^१८६] गुरौ पूज्यत्वेन मुख्ये, आचार्ये वा विध्यन्तरभावात् । 


[^१८६]:
     M G: upasanne vā upasanne ca

- <u>केचित् तु</u> **अश्रोत्रिये त्व्** इत्य् अत्र नञं संबध्नन्ति । इह नञः प्रश्लेषेण यो ऽन्येषाम् उपाध्यायस् तस्य च न कश्चित् तत्रेमं विधिम् आचक्षते ॥ ५.८१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The name ‘*rājan*’ is really applied indirectly to the man of a
particular caste as endowed with the qualifications of *anointment* and
the rest; that it is so is clear from the clause^(‘)*in whose realm he
lives*.’ In fact when the word signifies the lord of a country belonging
to a particular caste, it does so only by indirect indication, and not
by direct denotation.

‘*Till the light*’—*i.e*., it continues along with the light. That is,
if the death occurs during the day, the impurity lasts during the day
only, and it does not go on into the night; similarly if the death
occurs at night, it lasts during the night only, and does not extend to
the day. The fact that the text has used this peculiar
expression—‘*sajyotiḥ*’, ‘*till the light*’—in the present context (when
*only* day, and *only* night are meant),—is indicative of the fact that
whenever the term ‘day’ or ‘night’ is used, it means *both day and
night*; *e.g*., in verses 5.66 and 5.59. in 5.64 also, where the term
‘night’ is used in addition to the term ‘day’, it is added only for the
purpose of filling up the metre.

At night, the ‘light’ is that of fire, as we rend in the Brāhmaṇa-text
bearing upon the *Agnihotra*—‘The night becomes resplendent with the
light of fire, not with the light of the Sun.’

In the case of the ‘*non-learned*’—who does not study the
Veda—‘*teacher*’—it lasts during the whole day; it does not extend to
the night, even when the cause of impurity happens during the night.

“How can a ‘non-learned’ man be a ‘teacher’? In fact it is only one who
has learnt the Veda along with its subsidiary sciences that is entitled
to do the work of *teaching*.”

True; but a mere *expounder* is also called a ‘teacher.’ Hence what is
meant is that ‘in the case of the person who has, somehow, learnt the
subsidiary sciences (without learning the Veda) and expounds them, the
impurity lasts during the day.’ That this must be the meaning is
indicated by the fact that there is a distinct rule reference to the
Teacher who is properly qualified, or to the Initiating Preceptor, who
is the principal object of reverence.

Some people connect the negative prefix in ‘*non-learned*’ with the term
‘teacher’; and explain the rule laid down as referring to ‘the learned
man who is the teacher of other persons, and bears no relation to the
person concerned’.—(81).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 82 of others.)

‘*Anūcāne tathā gurau*’—‘A *guru* who expounds the Veda along with the
subsidiary sciences’ (Govindarājā, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘the *guru
and* the person capable of expounding the Veda’ (Nārāyaṇa);—Medhātithi
construes ‘*anūcāne*’ with ‘*aśrotriye*’, and explains it to mean ‘one
who, though not learned in the Veda, is yet conversant with the
subsidiary sciences’;—Nandana (and also ‘others’ in Medhātithi) read
‘*agurau*’, and explains ‘*anūcāne agurau*’ ‘one who is learned in the
Vedas and its subsidiaries, but is not one’s *guru*’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 215), which explains ‘*Sajyotiḥ*’
as that *impurity* which lasts ‘as long as the light’, of the sun, or of
the stars;—in *Mitākṣarā*, which also explains the meaning to be that
the impurity lasts as long as the light; *i*. *e*., if death has
occurred during the day, then it lasts till sunset, while if it has
occurred during the night, then as long as the stars are visible;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 613), which offers the same explanation,
and in the same words, as Mitākṣarā;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 435), which
explains the term ‘*Sajyotiḥ*’ as ‘lasting as long as the light’, and
adds—‘during the day, it lasts till sunset, and during the night, till
sunrise’;—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 76), which adds the following
explanation:—That Kṣatriya king in whose territories one lives, if such
a king, who is not a Vedic Scholar, dies, then the impurity is
‘*Sajyotiṣ*’, *i*.*e*., if the death occurs during the day, it lasts as
long as the sun is visible, and if it occurs during the night, then as
long as the stars are visible,—if the said king is an expounder of the
Veda, the impurity lasts the whole day and night,—‘anūcāna’ is one who
has studied the Veda and is capable of expounding it,—similarly if the
‘*guru*’ dies, the impurity lasts the whole day and night, ‘*guru*’ is
one who has taught a little of the subsidiary sciences.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (22-45, 46).—‘The impurity lasts for one day, when the king of
that country in which one lives has died; likewise if a man not his
*Sapiṇḍa* has died at his house.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.25).—‘Purity is attained on the same day, in the case
of the death of the king in whose realm one lives.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

082	If the king in whose realm he resides is dead, (he shall be impure) as long as the light (of the sun or stars shines), but for (an intimate friend) who is not a Srotriya (the impurity lasts) for a whole day, likewise for a Guru who knows the Veda and the Angas.
</details>
