+++
title = "083 शुद्ध्येद् विप्रो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa becomes pure in the days, the Kṣatriya in twelve days, the Vaiśya in fifteen days and the Śūdra in a month.—(82).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

क्षत्रियादीनां प्रागुक्तवृत्ताद्यपेक्षस् त्र्यहचतुरहादिकल्पव्यावृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् । ब्राह्मणे दशाहस् त्व् अनूद्यत एव । 

- <u>अत्र त्व्</u> इदं वाच्यम्-[^१८७] केन क्षत्रियादीनां द्वादशाहेन नियतकालाप्राप्तिर् येन कल्पान्तरव्यावृत्त्यर्थतावगम्यते । 


[^१८७]:
     M G: vākyaṃ

- <u>इयम्</u> एव ह्य् एषाम् इयत्कालस्य प्रापकम् । सत्य् अस्मिंस् तत्र दशाहो ऽयम् आशौचकालस् तदुपलक्षणार्थो विज्ञायते । 

- <u>न</u>[^१८८]<u> च</u> सत्य् अप्य् अस्मिंस् तस्योपलक्षणार्थता । सत्य् अपि चातुर्वर्ण्याधिकारे यस्यैव दशाह उक्तस् तस्यैवेतरे कल्पा इति । स्मृत्यन्तरे च ब्राह्मणविवक्षयैवोक्तम्- "एकाहाद् ब्राह्मणस्य स्यात् स्वाध्यायः" इत्यादि । तेषां तु स्मृत्यन्तरे यानि कल्पान्तराण्य् आम्नातानि तानि[^१८९] विकल्प्यन्ते[^१९०] । एकादशे आशौचकालः कश्चिद् विवरणकार आह-  "शुद्ध्येद् विप्रो दशाहेन" इति । अत्राहर्ग्रहणं विवक्षितम्, तेन दशम्यां रात्रौ नास्त्य् आशौचम् । ततः पूर्वेद्युर् निमन्त्रणादि युक्तम् । अग्निं चाधास्यतः पौर्वाह्णिकजागरणादिनाशौच उपक्रान्तो[^१९१] भविष्यति । 


[^१९१]:
     M G: upakrāntaṃ


[^१९०]:
     M G: vikalpante


[^१८९]:
     M G omit: tāni


[^१८८]:
     M G: nanu

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । अहर्विवक्षायाम् आद्यास्व् अपि रात्रिषु न स्याद् आशौचम् । अथ "दशाहं शावम्" (म्ध् ५.५९) इति एतस्मात् तत्र भविष्यति । अत्राविवक्षायां किं प्रमाणम् । तस्माद् अहःशब्दो ऽयम् अहोरात्रवचन इति प्रदर्शितम् । तथा च पूर्वश्लोके "अहः कृत्स्नम्" (म्ध् ५.८१) इति रात्रिनिवृत्त्यर्थं कृत्स्नग्रहणम् ॥ ५.८२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The alternative rales—limiting the period of impurity to ‘three days’,
‘four days’ &c.,—have been laid down above, in consideration of the
character and learning of the persons concerned; and the present verse
is added with a view to preclude those alternatives from the *Kṣatriya*
and other castes. The mention of ‘ten days’ in regard to the *Brāhmaṇa*
however is a mere reiteration.

In this connection the following question is likely to arise—“What is
the text that restricts the period of impurity for the *Kṣatriya* to
*twelve days* (or of the *Vaiśya* to fifteen days, and so forth)
compulsorily, on the strength whereof the present verse is taken as
precluding the other alternatives from them?”

This present text itself serves to indicate the time mentioned as
applying to those castes. And in the face of this text, the other
periods of ‘ten’ days and so forth, wherever mentioned, are understood
to be merely indicative of the period specified for each caste. As a
matter of fact, however, even in the presence of the present verse, the
mention of ‘ten days’ need not be taken to be indicative (as just
stated). For even though the section as a whole may pertain to all four
castes, yet the alternatives mentioned can pertain only to that caste
for whom the period of ‘ten days’ has been laid down. In another
Smṛti-text it is with special reference to the *Brāhmaṇa* that it has
been asserted that—‘the *Brāhmaṇa* may resume Vedic study after one
day’; and it is to this that all the other alternatives mentioned in
other Smṛti texts have to be taken as optional. In any case, on the
eleventh day there is no impurity at all.

The author of the *Vivaraṇa* says that in the present verse special
significance is meant to be attached to the use of the term ‘day’ (and
it is the *day* that is meant, as distinguished from the *night*); so
that there is no impurity on the tenth *night*; and hence it is only
right and proper that invitations to the *śrāddha* on the eleventh day
should be issued on the previous day. When a person is going to set up
the Fire, the impurity shall be wiped off by the vigil kept daring the
previous night.

This however is not right. If the term ‘day’ meant the *day* only, then
on the other days also there would be no imparity daring the *nights*.
It might be argued that those intervening *nights* would (all within the
period of impurity by virtue of the general rule that ‘impurity due to
death *lasts for ten days*’ (5.59). But what is the authority for
denying a similar significant to the term ‘day’ in this context also?

Is is for these reasons that we have explained that throughout this
context the word ‘day’ stands for the *day and night*. It is for this
reason that in the preceding verse, where the day only is meant, we have
the epithet ‘*whole*’, ‘*kṛtsnam*’ added to it.—(82).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 83 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 245) as laying down the
period of impurity for each several caste;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla,
p.288);—in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 64);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p.
115);—in *Dānakriyākaumudī* (p. 21);—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 6), which
says that the meaning is that on the death of a *Sapiṇḍa* who is over
six years and two months of age,—for the survivor who is ignorant of the
Veda and has not set up the fires, but has passed through all the
sacramental rites, the impurity in the case of the Brāhmaṇa lasts for
ten days;—it adds that if death occurs before sunrise, then the
preceding day is to be counted among the ten,—if the survivor is an
Agnihotri or Vedic scholar, it is over in a single day;—and in
*Hāralatā* (pp. 4 and 9).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.2-5).—‘The impurity of the Kṣatriya lasts for eleven days;
of a Vaiśya, twelve days, or according to some, half-a-month; and that
of a Śūdra, a whole month,’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.26-29).—‘A Brāhmaṇa is freed from impurity, after ten
days; a Kṣatriya, after fifteen days; a Vaiśya, after twenty days, a
Śūdra, after a mouth.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.1-1).—‘The impurity of a Brāhmaṇa caused by the birth or
death of *Sapiṇḍas* lasts ten days; of a Kṣatriya, twelve days;—of a
Vaiśya, fifteen days, of a Śūdra, a month.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.22-23).—‘The impurity lasts for twelve days for the
Kṣatriya, fifteen days for the Vaiśya, thirty days for the Śūdra; but
only half the time, if the person affected is one who remains firm in
law.’

*Aṅgiras* (Aparārka, p. 911).—‘On the death of a Brāhmaṇa after tonsure,
his relations are purified in three days; on that of a Kṣatriya, in six
days; on that of a Vaiśya, in nine days; on that of a Śūdra less than
three years old, in five days; on that of one three years old, in twelve
days; on that of a Śūdra more than six years old, in a month.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Aparārka, p. 912).—‘In eases where the impurity of the
Brāhmaṇa lasts three days, that of the Śūdra lasts twelve days; and that
of the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, for six and nine days respectively.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

083	A Brahmana shall be pure after ten days, a Kshatriya after twelve, a Vaisya after fifteen, and a Sudra is purified after a month.
</details>
