+++
title = "084 न वर्धयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should not prolong the days of impurity; nor should he interrupt the rites performed in the fires; because he who performs those rites, even if he be a Sapiṇḍa, would never he impure.—(83).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस्यैषा बुद्धिः- "य उक्तास् त्र्यहादयः कल्पास् तुल्यं दशाहेन विकल्प्यन्ते, न वृत्तादिव्यवस्थयेति, ततश् चिरतरकालम् अन्यस्य संभवे किम् इत्य् एकाहपक्षं नित्यस्वाध्यायाक्लेशकरं[^१९२] प्रतिपत्स्ये, दशाहम् अपाश्रयामि निष्कर्मसुखम् आसिष्ये" इति — तं प्रति सौहार्द्देन सा व्यवस्था स्पष्टीक्रियते । नैते तुल्या अपि तु व्यवस्थिता एव । व्यवस्था च प्राग् दर्शिता । अन्यथा यस्याशौचकालो विहितस् तस्य ततः कालावधिकस्य कुतो वृद्धिप्राप्तिः, येनैवम् अर्थ्वत् स्यात् । विस्पष्टार्थत्वे को दोषः ।


[^१९२]:
     J: nityasvādhyāyakleśakaraṃ

- <u>अन्ये त्व्</u> आहुर् अतीतेष्व् अप्य् अहःसु यावत् स्नानादिक्रिया न कृता तावन् नैव शुद्धिः । "विप्रः शुध्यत्य् अपः" (म्ध् ५.९८) इत्यादि वक्ष्यति । तत्राशुचित्वाद् अननुष्ठानेन न दुष्यामीति[^१९३] स्नानादिषु शुद्धये न प्रवर्तते । तत्रैवम् उच्यते "**न वर्धयेत्**" नातीतेष्व् अहःसु बाह्याशौचे विलम्बितव्यम् । 


[^१९३]:
     M G: anuṣṭhānena duṣyāmīti

- ये त्व् अहःशब्दो दशमस्याह्नो या रात्रिस् तस्याम् आशौचं न भवतीति, ते न सम्यङ् मन्यत इत्य् उक्तम् । तथा च गौतमः आशौचमध्य आशौचान्तर उत्पन्ने तच्छेषेण शुद्धिः इत्य् उक्त्वा (ग्ध् १४.६), एकस्यां रात्रौ शेषायां तयैव शुद्धिं मन्यमान आह "रात्रिशेषे द्वाभ्याम्" (ग्ध् १४.७) इति ।

- **प्रत्यूहेन् नाग्निषू क्रियाः** । अशुचित्वात् सर्वश्रौतस्मार्तक्रियानिवृत्तौ प्राप्तायाम् इदम् उच्यते । अग्निषु याः क्रियाः सायंहोमाद्यास् ता न प्रत्यूहेन् न प्रत्यस्येत् । प्रत्यूहो निर्हास अननुष्ठानम् । न च स्वयं कुर्याद् यत आह **न च तत्कर्म कुर्वाणः सनाभ्यो ऽपीति** । सनाभ्यो ऽपि नाशुचिः स्यात् किं पुनर् अन्यः । तथा गृह्यम्- "नित्यानि निवर्तेरन् वैतानवर्जं शालाग्नौ चैके" इत्य् उक्त्वा आह "अन्य एतानि कुर्युः" (पार्ग् ३.१०३२–३४) इति । न च यद् अग्न्याधानं होममात्रम् एव क्रियते, किं तर्हि साङ्गप्रयोगः, तत्रैव कर्तुर् नरस्य संभवात् प्रधानहोमस्य तु द्रव्यत्यागरूपत्वात् स्वयंकर्तृतैव । अतो होमवैश्वदेवदर्शपूर्णमासाद्या निवर्तन्ते । अन्येषां तु जपसंध्योपासनादीनां निवृत्तिर् न दर्शिता । तानि च नित्यानि । अतो अन्येषाम् एवाभ्यनुज्ञानं यतः स्मृत्यन्तरे प्रतिषिद्धम्- "होमः स्वाध्यायश् च निवर्तते" (विपु ३.१३.१८) इति । अतो नित्यकांयभेदेन व्यवस्था । काम्यं तु नैव कर्तव्यम् अशुचित्वाद् अधिकारापगमात् ।

- <u>ननु</u> च नित्येष्व् अपि नैवाशुचेर् अधिकारः । 

- <u>न च</u> शौचम् अङ्गम् । यदि विगुणं नित्यम् अनुष्ठीयते, न काम्यम् इत्य् उच्यते । 

- <u>अथास्माद्</u> वचनाद् भवति ।

- <u>मैवम्</u> । इह यद् अपि मानं तद् अस्यान्य एतानि कुर्युर् इति परकर्तृत्वम् अभ्यनुज्ञायते । तच् च विगुणत्वान् नित्येषूपपद्यते न काम्येषु । 

- वैश्वदेवे तु विवदन्ते । स्मृत्यन्तरं चोदाहरन्ति ।

- होमं तत्र न कुर्वीत शुष्कधान्यफलैर् अपि ।

- एवं यज्ञविधानं तु न कुर्यान् मृत्युजन्मनोः ॥

अतः संध्याहोमौ दर्शपूर्णमासौ सांवत्सरिकं चाश्वयुज्यादि कर्तव्यम् । उपाकरणं तु नक्षत्राश्रयम् एव, न पौर्णमास्याश्रयम् ॥ ५.८३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people may entertain the following notion:—“The various
alternatives that have been laid down regarding the period of impurity
extending to three days, *&c*., all stand on an equal footing with the
alternative of ‘ten days,’ and their adoption is not regulated by
considerations of character and study, etc.; so that the observing of
the longer period being open to me, why should I have recourse to the
alternative of ‘one day’, which would entail the trouble of resuming my
studies sooner? I shall have recourse to the alternative of ‘ten days’,
and shall enjoy the pleasure of having nothing to do for a longer
period.”

It is for the benefit of such a person that the author, moved by
sympathy, makes it clear that the optional alternatives are regulated by
other considerations; and that they do not all stand on the same
footing. In what way they are regulated has been already shown by us.

If this be not the meaning of the present advice, and if it mean
something else,—what possibility would there be of any prolongation of
the period that has been specifically fixed for each individual? And it
is only with such a possibility that there could be room for the advice
contained in the present verse. What harm could there be in the author
making still clearer what he has already said before (regarding the
regulation of the optional alternatives)?

Some people hold that—even after the prescribed number of days have
elapsed, purification is not accomplished until bathing and other rites
have been performed; as it is going to be asserted that ‘the *Brāhmaṇa*
becomes pure after touching water, etc.’ (Verse 98); and some one may
think that so long as he remains impure he would not incur any sin by
the omission of religious duties, and hence he may not proceed to take
the bath or other rites;—and it is in view of such cases that we have
the injunction that ‘*one should not prolong the days of impurity*,’—the
meaning being that the stipulated days having elapsed, one should not
delay the external purifications.

As regards the assertion that—“the use of the term *day* implies that
there is no impurity on the *night* of the tenth day,”—it has already
been pointed out that this view is not correct. Says Gautama (14.6)—‘If
during one impurity another source of impurity should arise, there is
purification after the remainder of the former’; and having said this,
he thought that people might be led to think that if the second impurity
should arise about the end of the last night, there would be
purification after that night, and in order to guard against this he has
added—‘if it happens about the end of the night, then after two nights’
(14.7) \[From which it is dear that the lost *night* also falls within
the period of impurity\].

‘*Nor should he interrupt the rites performed in the fires*.’—This is
said in view of the fact by reason of impurity all the rites prescribed
in the *Śruti* and the *Smṛti* become precluded. The meaning is that the
rites that are performed in the fires,—such as the Evening-libation and
the rest—should not be *interrupted*,—*i.e*., shall not be omitted.
‘*Interruption*’ means *omission, non-per* *formance*.

But this does not mean that the impure man should himself perform the
rites; since it is added—‘*he who performs the rites*, *even if he be a
Sapiṇḍa, would never be impure*’; which means that ‘even a
Sapiṇḍa-relation would not be impure, to say nothing of other persons’;
says the *Gṛhyasūtra* also—‘They should perform in the house-fire the
obligatory rites, with the exception of the *Vaitāna* -rite’; and
then—‘others would perform these.’ This does not refer to the mere
offering of libations that is done in connection with the setting up of
the fires, but to the performance of the rite in all its details; since
it is only for these that the employment of other agents is possible,
since the principal libation itself, which consists in offering certain
substances, can be offered by the householder himself. Hence the rites
that are precluded (daring impurity) are those of the
*Vaiśvadeva-offering* and the *Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices. Of
other nets, such as the telling of beads, the saying of Twilight Prayers
and so forth,—the preclusion of these has nowhere been indicated; and
all these are obligatory. Hence what the present taxt does is to permit
the performance of other acts; specially as another *Smṛti* text has
prohibited such acts as ‘the offering of libations and Vedic study.’
Thus then, the distinction (as to what acts are precluded and what not)
is based upon the obligatory or voluntary character of the acts
themselves; specially as the voluntary act tending to the accomplishment
of desired ends should never be done, since impurity deprives the man of
the title to perform all such acts.

“But the impure man cannot be entitled to the performance of the
obligatory acts either.”

As a matter of fact, *purity* does not constitute an essential factor in
the rites; and though an obligatory act may be done even in a slightly
deficient form (due to the lack of *purity*, for instance), such is not
permissible in the case of voluntary acts done with a view to definite
ends. It might be argued that they also might be performed, on the
strength of the present text itself. But this would not be right; for
all that the present text permits is getting certain rites performed by
proxy; and as this in itself would be a deficiency, it would be
admissible in the case of the obligatory rites only, and not in that of
voluntary ones.

With regard to the *Vaiśvadeva* offering however, there is a difference
of opinion. Some people quote the following *Smṛti* -text—‘At a birth or
a death, one shall not pour libations into fire, even with dry grains or
fruits, nor should he perform any sacrificial rites.’

From all this it follows that one should offer the following the
Twilight-libations, the *Dūrśa-Purṇamāsa* sacrifices, the Annual
*Śrāddha*, the *Śrāddha* offered in the month of Āśvina and so forth. As
for the Upākarma, its performance depends upon the lunar asterism and it
need not be done on the full-moon-day.—(83.)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 84 of others.)

‘*Pratyūhenṅāgniṣu kriyāḥ*’—Medhātithi has been misrepresented here, not
only by Buhler, but by Kullūka also. There is nothing in Medhātithi to
show that *Sandhyopāsana* should be omitted for ten days. Nor is there
any difference in the interpretation of Medhātithi and that of Kullūka
and others. (See *Translation*.)

‘*Sanābhayaḥ*’—‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda);—‘*Sahodara*’, ‘uterine brother’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 891), which adds the following
notes:—With a view to remaining idle, without having to perform his
religious duties, one should not prolong the days of impurity; nor
should he abandon those necessary acts that are prescribed to be
performed in the *śrauta* fires,—*e.g*., the Agnihotra offerings; the
meaning is that all those should be done even during the days of
impurity;—the second half is added in anticipation of the objection that
“in view of the rule whereby *impure* men are not entitled to the
performance of religious acts, it would be right to abandon the acts
during the period of impurity.” What is meant is that it is quite true
that the *impure* m an should not perform religious acts; but on the
strength of the special texts (like the present one) hearing upon
certain Well defined acts, one would be justified in concluding that he
is *not* ‘impure’, so far as the performance of these acts is
concerned.—The use of *Atmanepada* form ‘*kurvāṇaḥ*’ makes it clear that
the actual *performer* of the religions acts is *not impure*—even though
the person dead or born be a very near relation of his,—in fact he is
quite pure. Inasmuch as this absence of impurity refers to the
*performer* himself, it follows that so far as officiating at the
performance of other persons is concerned, the near relations of the
dead or the born must be regarded as *impure* and unqualified.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.17), in support of the view that there
is no impurity regarding the performance of those religious acts that
are compulsory, the voluntary ones, however, which are done for the
purpose of gaining reward, should not be performed during impurity;—and
it adds that since the text specifically mentions the acts done ‘in the
fires’, it follows that the ‘five great sacrifices,’ which are not done
in *fire*, should cease during impurity.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 254) as affording justification
for the coalescing of ‘impurities’ due to more than one cause;—in
*Hāralatā* (pp. 7 and 25), which notes that the expression ‘*tat karma*’
implies that the impurity means incapacity to perform such acts as
Fire-kindling, gifts, Homa and so forth, and adds the following
notes:—‘*aghāhāni*’, days of impurity, those should not be prolonged by
the Agnihotrin, for whom its curtailment is justified by distinct texts;
and he should never observe the full period of ten days,—even dining the
curtailed period, he should not entirely stop the offerings into the
Fires, he should have this done through Brāhmaṇas belonging to other
*gotras* and hence not suffering from the same disabilities,—and the
reason for this lies in the fact that in the performance of the said
acts of disablity does not attach even to the *Sapiṇḍa*,—what to say of
persons of other *gotras*?

It is quoted also in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 278), which explains
‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ as *Sapiṇḍa*,—‘*tatkarma*’ as *officiating as a
priest*,—the disability due to impurity does hot attach to him, if no
person of other *gotras* is available for the work,—such is the
implication of the particle ‘*api*’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (3.17).—‘One should continue to perform all the
fire-worship, as also all those acts that are enjoined in the Veda.’

*Vyāghrapāt* (Aparārka, p. 892).—‘During the period of impurity one
should stop all *smārta* rites; but for the purpose of *śrauta* rites,
one becomes pure immediately, by bathing.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (3.13.31-34).—‘During the period of impurity, one
should not carry on Vedic study one should intermit the daily rites,
with the exception of those performed with the help of the *śrauta*
fire, or with that of the domestic fire, according to some:—others
should perform those for him.’

*Jābāla* (Aparārka, p. 892).—‘During the impurity due to birth and
death, there is no intermission of rites performed in the *śrauta* fire;
as regards the domestic fire, libations into it should be poured by
persons belonging to another *gotra*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘During impurity due to birth or to death, one shall
not abandon the fire-offerings, he shall have them offered by others.’

*Jātūkarṇya* (Do.).—‘During an impurity, *Piṇḍayajña, Caru-Yajña*, and
*Homa*, should be got done by a person not belonging to the same
*gotra*.’

*Saṃvarta*, (Do.).—‘The Homa-offerings should, during impurity, be made
with dry grains or fruits; but the performance of the five Great
Sacrifices should be intermitted. For ten days, the Brāhmaṇa shall
desist from the *Vaiśvadeva* offering.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Do.).—‘O king, the offering of the twilight-prayers
should he done at all times, except during impurity.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘During impurity, one shall only offer water with
the *Sāvitrī* and meditating upon the sun, offer his obeisance.’

*Pulastya* (Do. p. 893).—‘The twilight-prayers, the Iṣṭi, the *Caru* and
*Homa* one should perform all through life; even during impurity one
shall not omit these During impurity due to death or birth, one should
not omit the twilight prayers; the Brāhmaṇa shall repeat the *mantras*
only mentally—even so omitting the Breath-suspension.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

084	Let him not (unnecessarily) lengthen the period of impurity, nor interrupt the rites to be performed with the sacred fires; for he who performs that (Agnihotra) rite will not be impure, though (he be) a (Sapinda) relative.
</details>
