+++
title = "085 दिवाकीर्तिम् उदक्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

After having touched the Cāndāla, the menstruating woman, the outcast, the woman in child-bed, the dead body, or toucher thereof—one becomes pure by bathing.—(84).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दिवाकीर्तिश्** चाण्डालः, अत्यन्ताशुचिसाहचर्याद् भारते च प्रयोगदर्शनान् मार्जारमूषिकसंवादे ।

- तस्मिन्न् अपि च काले ऽभूद् दिवाकीर्तिर् भयार्दितः । इति । (म्भ् १२.१३६.१०६)

न नापितः, तस्य स्पृश्यत्वात् भोज्यान्नत्वाच् च । यत् तु श्मश्रुकर्मणि तस्येदं स्नानम् इत्य् आहुस् तद् अपि सिद्धत्वाद् अवाच्यम् । अवश्यं[^१९४] श्मश्रुकर्माणि कारयतो रोमाणि गात्राणि स्पृशन्ति, तानि शरीराच् च्युतान्य् अशुद्धानीति सिद्धं स्नानम् । **तत्स्पृष्टिनं** तस्य स्पृष्टं तत्स्पृतम्, तद् अस्यास्तीति **तत्स्पृष्टी** । येनैते स्पृष्टास् तद् अपि स्नानम् एव । 


[^१९४]:
     M G: āvaśyaṃ

- इह सर्वस्याप्रत्यासत्तेः **तत्स्पृष्टिनम्** इत्य् अनेन संबन्धः शवस्यैव <u>केचिद्</u> आहुर् न दिवाकिर्त्यादीनाम् । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> एकवाक्योपनिपाताद् अन्ते श्रुतत्वात् सर्वेषां बुद्धौ संनिधानात् तच्छब्देन[^१९५] सर्वनाम्ना परामर्श इति । अत्र हि शवपर्यन्तानां द्वन्द्वं कृत्वा स्पृष्टीत्य् अनेन संबन्धः । तत्र तत्स्पृष्टीति समासार्थस्य बुद्धौ संनिहितत्वात् तच्छब्देनावमर्शः । न हि केवलस्य शवस्य स्पृष्टिपदेन[^१९६] संबन्धो लक्ष्यते, पतितादिभिर् इतरेतरयुक्तत्वात्[^१९७] । किं तु केवलस्य पदान्तसंबन्धः । द्वन्द्वे ह्य् एकैकः शब्दः सर्वार्थाभिधायी । ततः सर्वे प्रत्यासन्नः । अथापि शवस्पृष्टिशब्दस्य तत्स्पृष्टिपदेन संबन्धं कृत्वा ततो ऽन्यैर् अभिसंबन्धः । तथा सति पतितादीनां स्पृष्टिपदेन संबन्धो न स्यात् । तस्मात् समाचारत एव निर्णयः ॥ ५.८४ ॥


[^१९७]:
     M G: itarair yuktatvāt


[^१९६]:
     M G 1st ed.: na hi śavaspṛṣṭipadena


[^१९५]:
     M G: saṃnidhānātacchabdena
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*divākīrti*’ is the *cāṇḍāla*; that it is so is clear from the fact
that he is mentioned along with the worst untouchables, and also from
the use of the name in the *Mahābhārata*, in course of a conversation
between the Cat and the Mouse—‘at that time the *Divākīrti* became
oppressed with fear’ (where it is the *cāṇḍāla* that is clearly meant).
It cannot stand for the *barber* here; for the barber is among the
touchables, and also because he is one whose food may be eaten (by the
*Brāhmaṇa*). As for the rule laying down the necessity of bathing after
a shave, this cannot be put forward in the present context, as the
bathing in this case is necessitated by the consideration that, while
one is shaving hairs are bound to fall on the body, and as, on falling
from the body, they are unclean, it is necessary that one should bathe.

‘*Tatspṛṣṭinam*’, ‘*the toucher thereof*.’—This compound is to be
expounded as—‘*tasya spṛṣṭam, tadasyāsti*’. The men who touch those
mentioned above have also got to bathe.

Some people argue that, as the persons mentioned are not all in equal
proximity to the term ‘*tatspṛṣṭinam*,’ ‘*the toucher thereof*,’ this
refers to the ‘*dead body*’ only, and not to the ‘*Cāṇḍāla*’ and the
rest. But others hold that since all are mentioned in the same sentence,
and since the term occurs at the end of all the other persons mentioned,
all these are present before the mind, and hence referred to by the
pronoun ‘*thereof*‘; so that the construction intended is that all the
terms up to ‘*śaram*’, ‘*the dead body*’, form one copulative compound,
and then compounded with ‘*spṛṣṭinam*’, ‘*toucher*’; and hence when the
term ‘*the toucher thereof*’ comes up, all the things spoken of by all
the members of the copulative compound come to the mind. There is, on
the other band, nothing to indicate that the term ‘*toucher*’ is to be
connected with the ‘*dead body*’ only; for the simple reason that it is
equally connected with the ‘outcast’ and the rest also. In fact, all
that is clearly indicated is that the term ‘*toucher*’ is connected with
some other term that has gone before; in a copulative compound however,
each term is regarded as denoting all the things spoken of; and hence
all these latter are equally closely related to the term ‘*toucher*’.
Another construction that might be suggested is to construe the term
‘toucher thereof’ with the term ‘dead body’, and then with the other
terms. But in this case, there would be nothing to justify the
connection of the term ‘toucher’ with the ‘outcast’ and the rest.

From all this it follows that it is only on the strength of usage that a
right conclusion can be arrived at.—(84)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 85 of others.)

‘*Tatspṛṣṭinam*’—‘One who has touched these, *i.e*., the *Divākīrti* and
the rest’ (Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana); ‘one who has touched a
corpse’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is.quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 921), which adds the
following:—Even though through its proximity to the term ‘*śava*’,
‘*tatspṛṣṭinam*’ would appear to mean ‘one who has touched a *śava*’,
yet inasmuch as the ‘*Divākīrti*’ and others mentioned before also
belong, like the corpse, to the category of ‘unclean things’, it is only
right that one who touches the person that has touched *all those*
should bathe. This agrees with Medhātithi.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3. 30) to the effect that even when
between the man and an unclean thing, there interposes a *living thing*
(like the man who has touched the unclean things) the man has to bathe.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 258) to the effect that the man who
touches one who has touched the *Divākīrti* and the rest, should bathe;
*i.e*., the touch of an unclean thing defiles also when it is indirect,
being interposed by a living object (like the man touching the Divākīrti
&c.).

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 202), which explains
*Divākīrti* as ‘Chaṇḍāla’;—and in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 54), which
reproduces the note made by *Madanapārijāta* is quoted in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 257), which explains ‘*divākīrti*’ as
‘Chaṇḍāla’;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 796);—in *Śuddhikaumudī*. (p.
327), which explains ‘*divākīrti*’ as ‘chaṇḍāla’;—in *Ācāramayūkha* (p.
42);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 159 and 468), which explains
‘*tatspṛṣṭin*’ as ‘one who has touched a dead body’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (14.30).—‘On touching an outcast, a Caṇḍāla, a woman impure on
account of confinement, a woman in her courses, or a corpse,—and on
touching persons who have touched them,—he shall purify himself by
bathing in his clothes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.9.5).—‘On touching a tree standing on a sacred spot, a
funeral pyre, a sacrificial post, a *Caṇḍāla*, or a person who sells the
Veda,—a Brāhmaṇa shall bathe in his clothes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.36).—‘On touching one who sells the Veda, a
sacrificial post, an outcast, a funeral pyre, a dog or a *Caṇḍāla*, he
shall bathe.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.37).—‘When he has touched a sacrificial post, a pyre, a
burial ground, a menstruating woman, a woman lately confined, impure
men, or *Cāṇḍalas* and so forth,—he shall bathe, submerging both bis
body and his head.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.69).—‘After having touched one who has touched a corpse, or
a woman in her courses, or a *Caṇḍāla* or a sacrificial post,—bathing is
ordained.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.29).—‘On touching a woman in her courses or persons
suffering from impurity due to birth and death, one should bathe; on
touching persons who have touched them he shall rinse his mouth.’

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 921).—‘For one who touches one who has touched
these, bathing has been enjoined.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘On touching a woman in her courses, a corpse, a
*Caṇḍāla*, human bone with fat, one should bathe with his clothes on.’

*Chyavana* (Do., p. 922).—‘One shall bathe with clothes on on touching
an outcast, a *Caṇḍāla*, one who lives upon property belonging to gods,
the village-priest, the Soma-vendor, the sacrilìcial post, a funeral
pyre, a wood of the pyre, wine, wine-vessel, human bone with fat, one
who has touched a corpse, a woman in her courses, one who has committed
a heinous crime, or a corpse; after bathing, he should touch fire,
repeat the *Gāyatrī* a hundred and eight times, bathe again and then
rinse his mouth thrice.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 922).—‘An outcast, a woman lately confined, a
*Caṇḍāla*,— on touching these intentionally one becomes purified by
bathing with clothes on, touching fire and eating butter. On touching a
person who has touched a corpse, a *Caṇḍāla*, a funeral pyre, a
sacrificial post, a woman in her courses, intentionally, the Brāhmaṇa
shall become purified by bathing.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 923).—‘One whose food should not be
eaten, a woman lately confined, a eunuch, a cat, a *Caṇḍāla*, a dog, a
cock, an outcast, an excommunicated person, a corpse-carrier, a woman in
her courses, a pig,—on touching these one becomes purified by bathing.’

*Vṛddha-Yājñavalkya* (Do.).—‘On touching a *Caṇḍāla*, a *Pukkasa*, a
*Mleccha*, a *Bhilla*, a *Pārasīka*, one who has committed a heinous
crime,—one should bathe with clothes on.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘On touching a tree growing in a crematorium, a
funeral pyre, a sacrificial post, a *Caṇḍāla*, a Soma-vendor,—the
Brāhmaṇa should enter water with clothes on.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘A *Caṇḍāla*, an outcast, a corpse-carrier, a woman
lately confined, a woman in her courses,—on touching these one becomes
purified by bathing.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The woman in her courses, the woman lately
confined, the dog, the *Antyāvasāyin*, the corpse-carrier,—on touching
these there is impurity, from which one becomes purified by bathing with
clay and with clothes on.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 926).—‘If one happens to touch a *Caṇḍāla* and the
corpse and other things after sunset, he becomes purified by touching
fire and gold.’

*Aṅgiras* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 257).—‘On touching a person who has
touched a corpse, a woman in her courses and a woman lately confined or
one outcast—one becomes purified on bathing with clothes on.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do., p. 258).—‘If one touches by chance a person who has
been touched by a *Caṇḍāla*, a woman lately confined, or a corpse,—he
shall sip water and do *japa*; if one intentionally touches the said
person, he should sip water for the purpose of purifying himself.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

085	When he has touched a Kandala, a menstruating woman, an outcast, a woman in childbed, a corpse, or one who has touched a (corpse), he becomes pure by bathing.
</details>
