+++
title = "090 पाषण्डम् आश्रितानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Also from women, who have joined a heretic, who behave too freely, who have injured a child in their womb or their husband, and those who drink wine—(89).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

शास्त्रपरित्यागेन बाह्यदर्शनाश्रयं नरशिरःकपालरक्ताम्बरादिधारणं **पाषण्डम्**, **तदाश्रिताः** कृततल्लिङ्ग्परिग्रहाः तद्दर्शनवशवर्तिन्यः । **चरन्तीनां च कामतः** । तदाचारकुलस्थितित्यागेनेच्छामात्रानुवृत्त्यैकानेकपरपुरुषसंप्रयोगः[^२०६] कामचारः । **भर्तुर्** विषगरादिदानेन **गर्भस्य** च पातनं **द्रोहः** । **सुराप्यः** यथाप्रतिषेधं प्रतिषिद्धायाः पातेन ।


[^२०६]:
     M G: -vṛttyaikāneka-

- <u>अत्र कश्चिद्</u> आह- "ब्राह्मणो न पिबेत् सुराम्" इति सत्य् अपि जात्यर्थाविशेषे लिङ्गात् पुंस एव ब्राह्मणस्य प्रतिषेधो न स्त्रिया इति । यद्य् अपि स्त्रीपुंसयोर् एका जातिस् तथापि स्त्रीत्वपुंस्त्वलिङ्गे भिद्येते । इह च ब्राह्मण इति पुंल्लिङ्गस्य शब्दस्य श्रवणाद् अश्रुतायाः कः प्रसङ्गः । यथा "ब्राह्मणी पाययेत् पुत्रार्थम्" इति न पुंसः पाययेद् इति, तद्वत् पुंल्लिगश्रुतौ न स्त्रिय उपादीयन्ते । यत्र[^२०७] क्वचिल् लिङ्गं न विवक्ष्यते, यथ "ब्राह्मणो न हन्तव्यः" इति स्त्रिया अपि प्रतिषेधो विज्ञायते, तत्र द्वितीयया श्रुत्या ब्राह्मणस्येप्सिततमत्वात् प्राधान्यम् । न च प्रधाने प्रातिपदिकार्थव्यतिरेकेणान्यलिङ्गसंख्यादि विवक्ष्यते । यथा "ग्रहं संमार्ष्टि" इति नैकस्य संमार्गः । इह पुनर् "ब्राह्मणेन सुरा न पेया" इति कर्तृतया साधनभावेन क्रियां प्रति निर्देशात् "ब्राह्मणो न पिबेत् सुराम्" इत्य् आख्याताभिहिते ऽपि तदर्थानाम्[^२०८] अपि वृत्तेः प्रातिपदिकार्थोपपत्त्या प्रथमापि तृतीयानुगुण्येति गुणीभावः,[^२०९] गुणे च सर्वं श्रुतं विवक्ष्यते । यथा "पशुना यजेत" इति पुमान् पशुर् आलभ्यते एकश् च । 


[^२०९]:
     M G: guṇabhāvāt


[^२०८]:
     M G: tādarthyatānām


[^२०७]:
     M G omit: yatra

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । नात्र द्वितीयातृतीये गुणप्रधानभावेनाविवक्षाविवक्षयोः कारणम्, किं तर्हि प्राप्त्यप्राप्ती । यद् अप्राप्तं विधिविषयतयोपपद्यते[^२१०] तद् विवक्ष्यते, अनन्यपरशब्दावगम्यत्वात् । यत् त्व् अन्यतो ऽवगतम् अर्थान्तरं विध्यर्थम् उपादीयते, तद् यादृशम् एव प्रमाणान्तरावगतं तादृशम् एव विधेयकार्यान्तरसंबन्धितया शब्देन प्रतिपाद्यते । "ब्राह्मणो न हन्तव्यः" इत्य् अत्र वाक्ये विधिः प्रतिषेध एव पर्यवस्यति, यद् अन्यत् तद् अन्यतो ऽवगतम् । प्रातिपदिकार्थविवक्षा तु श्रुत्यानर्थक्यप्रसङ्गात् । लिङ्गसंख्यादेस् तु प्रत्ययार्थस्य नान्तरीयकत्वेनाप्य् उपादानसंभवाद् विवक्षाविवक्षे उच्येते । तत्रेह न ब्राह्मणादिभिः पुरुषो विधिना प्रवर्त्यः, तद्द्वेषात्[^२११] स्वतः प्रवृत्तेः, तत् सर्वस्य चात्र स्वयं प्रसङ्गात् । न ह्य् अविधीयमानः प्रतिषेधः कथंचिद् अन्वेतुम् अलम् । अन्यतः प्राप्त्यभावात्, अकारकत्वाद् अकारकविशेषणत्वात् स्वभावानुप्रवेशेनापि संबन्धं न[^२१२] लभ्यते । तस्माद् अस्यान्वयसिद्ध्यर्थं विषयभाव एषितव्यः । तस्मिंश् च विधिना विषयीकृतेन भावार्थो विषयतयापेक्ष्यते । भावार्थश् च प्रतिषेधेन विषयांशस्य गृहीतत्वात् ततः प्रच्युतो लौकिक्या[^२१३] च प्रवृत्त्या सिद्धानुष्ठान आत्मविधिसिद्ध्यर्थम् अनुप्रेवेशम् अप्य् अकांक्षन्न् अधिकारमात्रसापेक्षविधौ प्रमाणान्तरतः प्रतिपन्नहननकर्तृभावस्य पुंसो ऽधिकारतां प्रतिपादयंस् तद्विशेषणद्वारेणान्वयं प्रतिपद्यत इत्य् उपपन्नम् अन्विताभिधानम् । तेन भावार्थस्य सविशेषणस्याविधेयत्वाल् लौकिकी प्रवृत्तिर् अभ्युपेतव्या । अस्ति च रागलक्षणा प्रवृत्तिर् न तस्या लिङ्गसंख्यानियमो ऽस्ति, द्वेषाद् वा । तस्माद् अविधेयार्थशब्दो ऽवगतार्थपरत्वाद् अभिधानशक्तिम्[^२१४] उत्सृज्य प्रमाणान्तरतो यथावधृतस्वरूपम् अर्थं लक्षयति । तत्र लिङ्गसंख्ययोस् तात्पर्यतः शब्देनानभिधानात् कुतो विवक्षा । केवलं प्रातिपदिकनिर्देशार्थं येन केनचिद् वचनेन निर्देशः कर्तव्यः, न केवला प्रकृतिः प्रयोक्तव्येति तदर्थं लिङ्गसंख्ययोर् उपादानम् ।


[^२१४]:
     M G: abhidhānaṃ śaktim


[^२१३]:
     M G 1st ed.: pracyutalaukikyā


[^२१२]:
     M G add: na


[^२११]:
     M G: tadveṣāt


[^२१०]:
     M G: -opapadyeta-

- अत इयम् अत्रावगतिः । हनने ऽध्यवसितकर्तृभावः स नञर्थे नियुज्यते । अतः प्रतिषेधवाक्ये द्वितीयाश्रुतिर् अविवक्षायाम् अतन्त्रम्[^२१५] । यत्रापि[^२१६] हि तृतीया श्रूयते प्रथमा वा, "ब्राह्मणेन न पातव्या," "ब्राह्मणो न पिबेत्" इति तत्रापि तदर्थश् चान्यतः प्राप्तेर् अविधेयत्वाद् अनूद्यते । याधिकारविशेषणत्वेनैव संबद्धा तत्र ते[^२१७] द्वितीयाविशिष्टे प्रथमातृतीये । सत्याम् अपि च द्वितीयाश्रुतौ यद् अप्राप्तं तद्विधेयत्वाद् विवक्ष्यते यथा "भार्याम् उपगच्छेत्" "अपत्यम् उत्पादयेत्" इति । न हि लौकिको भार्यार्थः, उपयमनेनैव तत्सिद्धेः । 


[^२१७]:
     M G: saṃbadhyate | ete


[^२१६]:
     M G: yathāpi


[^२१५]:
     M G: avivakṣayā nātantram

- नापि वाक्यान्तरे विधिना क्वचिद् उपात्तो येन यथावगमम् उद्दिश्येत यथा "आश्विनं गृह्णाति" (त्ब् २.६.१.५), "मैत्रावरुणं गृह्णाति" (त्स् ६.४.८), "दशैतान् अध्वर्युर् गृह्णाति" (शाङ्ब् १४.२) इति संख्याविशिष्टा एव ग्रहा उपादीयन्ते । अतो निर्ज्ञातसंख्यत्वात् संमार्गविधौ यथासंख्यावगमं निर्दिश्यते । अत्र पुनर् वाक्यान्तराभावाद् अस्यैवोत्पत्तिवाक्यत्वाच् छ्रुतसंख्यापरित्यागे प्रमाणाभावान् निरपेक्षाभिधानशक्तिसमर्पितस्यैकस्य परित्यागः पुरुषबुद्धिप्रभव एव स्यात् । एवं "पशुना यजेत" (क्स् ८.१) इति यागविषयत्वाद् विधेस् तस्य च साध्यस्वभावत्वात् साधनाकांक्षायां समर्पितसविशेषणकारितसहितस्य विधेयत्वे यद्य् अर्थमात्रे विधिव्यापारापरिसमाप्तेः स्वार्थपरशब्दाभिहितापेक्षितस्वार्थाः किम् इति नयन्ति । 

- प्रमणाशास्त्रविदस् तु स्वयं विधिं वदन्ति[^२१८] अन्योक्तम् अवगाहन्ते । यत् त्व् अस्माभिर् उक्तं तत् सुखोपायग्राह्यम् । नातिमहती व्युत्पत्तिर् अत्रोपयुज्यते । इयद् एव च तत्सारम् । इयती सा विद्यानुष्ठानोपयोगिनी यदधिकम् आहोपुरुषिकामात्रं तदर्थवाद एव । तत्र ह्य् अर्थवादाद् विशेषावगतिर् भवति यत्राकांक्षा विधेर् अनिवृत्तेति[^२१९] । यथोकम् उपदधातीति बहुषु भोजनसाधनेषु सर्पिस्तैललवणादिषु सत्सु केनेत्य् अनवसाये घृतेनेति गम्यते । यथा तु रात्रिष्व् अनुष्ठानाश्रवणाद् आकांक्षायां प्रतितिष्ठन्तीत्य् अर्थवादः । अतः प्रतिष्ठाकामस्येति गम्यते । इह पुनर् ब्राह्मणा इति परिसमाप्तत्वात् पदार्थस्य निवृत्ताकाक्षेति[^२२०] स्तुतिमात्रापेक्षयार्थवादः । अथ लिङ्गदर्शनमात्रतयोपन्यस्यते "देवानाम् अश्नता हविः" (म्ध् ११.९४) इति । तस्माच् छ्रेयः संपन्नं पापीयान् अन्वेतीतिवत् तद् अपि पुंसः प्रतिषिद्धत्वात् पाक्षिकेनानुवादेन सालम्बनम् इति न किंचित् । स्त्रीणाम् अपि देवान्नशेषम् आज्यादिप्राशनम् अस्त्य् एव । वेदोदाहरश् च दर्शपूर्णमासादिषु "विदेयकर्मासि" (आश्श् १.११.१) इति । न च श्राद्दस्य कर्तुः सुरां पाययेद् इति चोदनया तासां पानम् अनुमीयते । ब्रह्महत्यादानेनैव ग्रहः । 


[^२२०]:
     M G: nivṛttakākṣeti


[^२१९]:
     M G: anivṛttir iti


[^२१८]:
     M G 1st ed.: vidhivad iti

- तस्माज् जातिमात्रस्य प्रतिषेध इत्य् एष एतस्यां विप्रतिपत्तौ निर्णयः ॥ ५.८९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One who has renounced the scriptures and has taken to wearing such
things as the human skull, red garments and so forth, on the bans of
heterodox theories of life and morals, is a ‘*heretic*.’ Those women who
have ‘*joined*’, Such a person,—*i.e*. who have adopted his
distinguishing murks and are under his control.

‘*Those who behave too freely*.’—When a woman renounces the customs and
usages of her family, and ullowing free scope to her desires, has
recourse to one as well as several men,—her behaviour is called ‘free.’

The ‘injury’ to the husband consists in giving him poison etc.; and that
to the child in the womb consists in abortion.

‘*Those who drink wine*;’—*i.e*. those who drink what is prohibited.

On this subject some one makes the following observations:—

“The prohibition of wine-drinking is found in the words ‘*brāhmaṇo na
pibet surām*’, (‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’); and though the
words apply to all members of the caste, yet the particular gender used
is indicative of the fact that the prohibition applies to males only,
and not to females. Though both the male and the female belong to the
same caste, yet there is a distinct difference between the masculine and
feminine genders. So that when the text uses the masculine form
‘*brāhmaṇaḥ*’, what possibility is there of the prohibition applying to
the female, who is not mentioned at all? For instance, when it is said
that ‘for the sake of a son one should make the *Brāhmaṇī* drink’ a
certain substance, it is not understood to mean that the *male* Brāhmaṇa
should be made to drink it. In the same manner when a text makes use of
the masculine form, what it asserts cannot be predicated of females. It
is true that in some cases, significance is not meant to be attached to
the particular gender used;—*e.g*., in the text ‘the Brāhmaṇa should not
be killed’, where the prohibition is understood to apply to the killing
of the *female* Brāhmaṇa also. But what happens in this latter case is
that the direct signification of the Accusative case-ending marks out
the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ to be the predominant factor by reason of his being
what is most intended to be ‘got at’ by the preadicate; and as a rule in
the case of the predominant factor no significance is attached to the
gender, or the number or any other factor, except what is expressed by
the basic noun itself. *E.g*. the injunction ‘wash the cup’ is not taken
to mean the washing of only *one* cup. In the case under discussion,
however, the prohibitive text is in the form ‘*Brāhmaṇena surā nu peyā*’
(‘wine shall not be drunk *by the Brāhmaṇa*’,) where the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*
appears as the Nominative, and as such, an accessory in the fulfilment
of the act denoted; so that in the case of the prohibition in the
form—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’—also, the nominative being
denoted by the verb (with its conjugational ending), is expressed by the
basic noun (‘*brāhmaṇa*’) and comes to be taken as something conducive
to the fulfilment of the act denoted by the verb; so that the nominative
ending in this text is to be construed on the same lines as the
Instrumental in the preceding text; and it has to be taken as a
subordinate factor. And in connection with a subordinate factor, all
that is expressed by the word has to be taken as significant; for
instance, in the case of the text ‘*paśunā yajeta*’, (‘sacrifice with an
animal’), it is the *male* animal that is always sacrificed (and this on
account of the Instrumental ending marking out the *animal* as the
subordinate factor).”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In such cases as the one under
consideration whether a certain thing form the predominant or the
subordinate factor is not determined by the Accusative or Instrumental
case-ending, but upon its being or not being already known. That is to
say, what is not already known, that alone can form the subject of the
Injunction, and this is to which due significance is meant to be
attached; and this for the simple reason that it is denoted by a word
which can have no other denotation; while what is already known from
other sources, and is mentioned for the sake of the In junction, has to
be taken as subserving the purposes of the Injunction in exactly the
same form in which it has been denoted by the previous word. In the
sentence ‘the Brāhmaṇa should not be killed’, all that the Injunction
directly signifies is the *prohibition* of the act of killing, and
everything else (mentioned in the sentence) is such as is already known
from other sources. Even so however, due significance has to be attached
to what is expressed by the basic nouns (in the sentence), as otherwise,
their very use would come to be meaningless. But the gender, the number
and other elements, which are denoted by the case-endings,—it is just
possible that these are used simply because they are invariable
concomitants of basic nouns (which cannot be used by themselves without
a case-ending); and hence sometimes these latter are meant to be
significant, sometimes not. As regards the killing of the Brāhmaṇa, no
man requires to be urged to do it by an Injunction; as he is urged to it
by his own hatred of the man he kills; and all men are, by their very
nature, prone to do this act But as regards the *prohibition* of it,
unless it were directly enjoined, it could not be got at by any means;
specially as it could not be obtained from any other source. So that,
since it is not in any way conducive to the fulfilment of an act, nor is
it the qualification of anything so conducive, hence, even though it
were to be included under the nature of man, it could not be connected
with the context. Consequently, for the purpose of connecting it with
the context it is necessary to attribute to it the character of the
*topic*; and when the prohibition in question has been made the topic of
the Injunction, it is no longer necessary to make the denotation of the
verb the topic. Thus then, the topical character having been wrested by
the Prohibition, what is denoted by the verb naturally loses that
character. The performance of the act (denoted by the verb) is such that
its performance is secured through ordinary tendencies (of men); so that
for its own accomplishment it does not stand in need of being embraced
by any Injunction; and all that it needs is the capacity (and desire) of
the man to do the act; and this, act of *killing*, being got at by other
means of knowledge, establishes the man’s capacity for doing the act; so
that it is through a qualification of the man that it becomes correlated
with the sentence. Thus it is quite in keeping with the theory of words
denoting only correlated entities. The act, along with its
qualification, thus not forming the topic of this Injunction, man’s
tendency to it has to be explained as being due to ordinary wordly
causes. As a matter of fact, in the case of killing, such tendency and
motive power is present, in the form of the man’s passion; and certainly
no restrictions of gender or number pertain to passion; or the activity
might be due to the man’s hatred.

From all this it follows that the word, whose denotation does not form
the topic of the Injunction, on the ground that it is already known,
renounces its denotative power and indicates a sense that is determined
by other means of knowledge. And in as much as gender and number are
not, even by import, signified by the word, how can any significance be
attached to them? It being necessary to speak of what is denoted by the
basic noun, it has to be spoken of with the help of some number and it
cannot be used entirely by itself; and it is for this reason that gender
and number are added.

On the point at issue thus the conclusion is as follows:

The man, who has determined to take upon himself the character of the
agent of the act of killing, is urged (by the prohibition) to what is
signified by the negative word. So that in a prohibitive sentence, no
significance need attach to the use of the Accusative ending, which
therefore may be ignored. Even sentences where we find the Instrumental
Ending, or even the Nominative—*e.g*., ‘wine shall not be drunk by the
Brāhmaṇa’, or ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’,—what is denoted by
them being already got at from other sources, they do not form topics of
the Injunction; and hence they are taken as spoken of only by way of
reference. In the case where the Accusative comes in as a qualification
of the motive, the Nominative and the Instrumental endings are always
taken along with the Accusative. Even when the Accusative is directly
used, that which is not already known from other sources forms part of
the enjoined (predicate), and, as such, is regarded as duly significant;
for example in the case of such texts, as ‘*bhāryām upagacchet*’ (‘one
should have recourse to his wife’), ‘*apatayam utpādayet*’ (‘one should
beget a child’) \[where due significance attaches to the singular number
in ‘wife’ and ‘child’\]. The ‘wife’ is not a a thing acquired in the
ordinary worldly manner; as she can be acquired only by means of the
marriage-rites. Nor is it a thing that has been definitively described
in an Injunction, which would strictly restrict it to what is enjoined
therein; as there is in the case of such texts as —‘*āśvinam grahṇāti*’
(‘holds the cup dedicated to the Aśvins’), ‘*maitrāvaruṇam grāhṇāti*
(‘holds the cup dedicated to Mitra-Varuṇa’), and
‘*daśaitānadhvaryurgṛhṇāti*’ (‘the Adhvaryu holds these then’) \[where
the exact character of the cups has been prescribed by the texts laying
down the dedication\], and the cups taken up are of the precise number
mentioned in the texts; consequently, their number being known, they
become connected with the in junction of the *washing*, in sequential
accordance with that number. Now in this case, there being no other
sentence, and the sentence in question itself being the originative
injunction, there are no grounds for rejecting the directly expressed
*number*; so that any rejection of what is expressed by the
self-sufficient denotative power of words could proceed only from the
mind of man. Similarly in the case of the text ‘*paśunā yajeta*’ (‘one
should sacrifice with an animal’), the Injunction pertains to the
*sacrifice*, which is of the nature of something to be accomplished; so
that when we proceed to seek for the means by which it could be
accomplished, all that is mentioned in the injunctive text,
qualification and all, comes to be regarded as the object of the
Injunction; specially because the function of the Injunction cannot be
regarded as having been fully fulfilled only by the laying down of what
is signified by the root ‘*yaji*’, ‘to sacrifice’; why, then, should not
the words be taken in the sense that is indicated by their own
denotation as helped by the denotation of other words connected with
them?

Persons versed in the science of “Pramāṇas” however regard the text as a
self-sufficient Injunction; and in this they only repeat what has been
said by other people. What we have said is easily understandable; and it
does not demand any very keen acumen to grasp it. It is the very essence
of things. The science is useful only so far as the Injunction is
concerned; anything more than that is a mere show of learning, a purely
exaggerated description. Such description is of use only in a case where
the Injunction does not supply all the information needed; as for
instance, in the case of the injunction regarding the ‘laying of
pebbles’, there being several articles such as butter, oil, salt and the
like, that are helpful towards wetting,—it being doubtful as to which of
these is to be used in the wetting of the ‘pebbles’, it is the
description (of Butter as ‘longevity itself’) which leads to the
conclusion that Butter should be used. Or again, in the case of the
‘*Ratri-sattra*’, the performance of sacrificial rites during the night
being unheard of anywhere else, the subsequent description of the ‘men
obtaining honour’ helps to indicate the propriety of such performance by
one who is desirous of acquiring honour or fame. In the case in question
however the sentence (which in Adh. 11, verses 92 *etc*. prohibit wine
for the Brāhmaṇa) is complete in all respects, at the mention of
‘*Brāhmaṇas*’; so that all needs having been fulfilled, the only purpose
served by the description is ‘commendation.’ It might be argued that
what is said under 11.96 is treated on the same footing as the assertion
that ‘the sinful man comes by accomplished happiness’,—so that the
prohibition of wine-drinking comes to have a footing, though a partial
one, as referring to the male only. But there would be no force in this;
because *females* also are entitled to partake of the butter and other
substances, which have been left after the offerings to the Gods have
been made; and they are permitted to recite Vedic texts also at the
Darśa-pūrṇamāsa and other sacrifices; such texts, for instance, as
‘*videyakarmāsi*, &c., &c.’ Even such Injunctions as ‘one should make
the performer of *Śrāddhas* drink wine’ indicate that wine is permitted
for women.

Nor is any such distinction (between *male* and *female*) made in the
case of ‘Brāhmaṇa-killing.’ So that upon the question here raised, the
final conclusion is that the prohibition of winedrinking pertains to the
whole caste—(89).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 90 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Hāralatā*, which has the following
notes:—‘*Pāṣaṇḍamāśṛtāḥ*’ applies to both men and women
*Kāmataścarantyaḥ*’ are those who have had intercourse with numberless
men,—for all those there are no after-death offerings;—and in
*Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 80).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 5.88-89)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
5.88].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

090	To women who have joined a heretical sect, who through lust live (with many men), who have caused an abortion, have killed their husbands, or drink spirituous liquor.
</details>
