+++
title = "093 न राज्ञाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This taint of uncleanliness does not attach to Kings, or to those keeping a vow, or to the performers of sacrificial sessions; because they occupy the position of sovereigns and are ever of the nature of Brahman.—(92).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**राज**शब्दो यद्य् अपि क्षत्रियजातौ वर्तते, तथापीह **ऐन्द्रं स्थानम् उपासीनाः** इति कारणस्योपादानाज् जनपदेश्वरवचनो लक्षणया विज्ञायते । उत्तरश्लोके निपुणं वक्ष्यामः । **व्रतिन्ः** व्रतचारिणः चान्द्रायणादिस्थाश् च । **सत्रिणः** गवामयनिका अन्यस्मिन् वा यज्ञे दीक्षिताः । तथा च गौतमः- "अनृत्विग्दीक्षितब्रह्मचारिणाम्"[^२२१] (ग्ध् १४.१) इति । अत्रार्थवादः- **ऐन्द्रं स्थानम्** आधिपत्यं पदं प्रजैश्वर्यम् **उपासीनाः** कुर्वाणा राजानः ब्रह्मत्वं प्राप्ता व्रतिनः सत्रिणश् च । **अघदोषम्** आशौचम् ।


[^२२१]:
     M G J: ṛtvig-

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु सततदानप्रवृत्तान् **सत्रिणो** मन्यन्ते । 

- मुख्ययानुवृत्त्या[^२२२] क्रतुविशेषे वर्तते ॥ ५.९२ ॥


[^२२२]:
     J: mukhyāyānuvṛttyā; DK (4: 950) suggests: mukhyayā tu vṛttyā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though the terra ‘*rājan*’, ‘king’, is denotative of the
*Kṣatriya-caste*, yet, on account of the reason being stated in the
words that ‘they occupy the position of sovereigns’, it follows that it
indicates the ruler of countries. This we shall explain fully under the
next verse.

‘*Those who are keeping a vow*;’—*i.e*., those who are observing a vow,
and undergoing such penances as those of the ‘*Cāndrāyaṇa*’ and the
like.

‘*Performers of sacrificial sessions*;’—*i.e*., those who are performing
the ‘*Gavāmayana*’ sacrifice, or those who have been initiated for the
other sacrifices also. Says Gautama (14.1)—‘For sacrificial priests, for
one who has been initiated and for the Student.’

In support of this we have the laudatory statement (in the second line).
‘*Position of Sovereigns*;’—*i.e*., the kings—‘*occupy*,’—maintain,—The
‘*position*’—place—‘*of* *sovereigns*’—of rulers of men; and the other
two—the keepers of vows and performers of sacrificial sessions—have
attained the character of Brahman.

‘*Taint of uncleanliness*’— *i.e*., impurity.

Others have explained the term ‘*Sattriṇaḥ*’ to mean persons who are
constantly making gifts. But in its primary denotation, the term refers
to a particular form of sacrifice.—(92).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 93 of others.)

This verse is quoted in Parāśaramādhava (Ācāra, p. 616).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.48).—(Same as Manu.)

*Gautama* (14.1.45-46).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* become impure by the death of a
relative during ton days, except those who are officiating as priests,
who have performed the initiatory sacrifice and the religious student.
Kings remain always pure, lest their business be impeded,—also the
Brāhmaṇa, lest his daily study of the Veda be interrupted.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.1).—‘Referring to deaths and births, they declare
that the impurity of *Sapiṇḍas* lasts ten days; except for officiating
priests, men who have performed the initiatory ceremony of the
Soma-Sacrifice, and students of the Veda.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.48-55).—‘Nor do kings become impure, while engaged in the
discharge of their duties, nor devotees fulfilling a vow; nor sacrifices
engaged in a sacrificial performance; nor workmen while engaged in their
work; nor those who perform the king’s orders, if the king desires them
to be pure; nor can impurity arise during the installation of the
monument of a deity, nor during a marriage ceremony, if those ceremonies
have already begun; nor when the whole country is afflicted with a
calamity; nor in times of public distress.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.27.28).—‘For officiating priests, for those initiated
for a sacrifice, for those engaged in sacrificial work, for those
engaged in a sacrificial session, for the religious student, for the
person engaged in charities, for the knower of Brahman,—also during a
marriage, during the giving of charities, during a sacrifice, during
war, in times of public distress, and in times of great
trouble,—purification is instantaneous.’

*Parāśara* (3.20-22).—‘Mechanics, artists, physicians, slaves and
slave-girls, barbers, kings and Vedic scholars have been declared to be
such as are purified instantaneously; so also the man keeping a penance,
one engaged in a sacrificial session and the twice-born person who has
taken the Fires. There is no impurity for the king, or for the person
for whom the king desires it to cease, or one who is going to engage in
battle, or in a charity, or one who is in distress, or the Brāhmaṇa who
has been invited.’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 615).—‘The work done by the painter and
other artists is such as is not known to others; hence in the doing of
their own work, they are always pure. The work that is done by the cook
is such as is not known to others; hence the cook is always pure. What
is done by the physician cannot be done by any one else; hence for
purposes of touching, the physician is always pure. The work that the
male and the female slaves do with ease, no one else can do; hence they
are always pure. The work that the king does—how can any one even dream
of doing? Such being the case the king is always pure, in the matter of
births and deaths. The driving of elephants and such other works as are
done by the royal servants cannot be done by others; hence these are
always pure.’

*Pracetas* (Do.).—‘Mechanics, artists, physicians, male and female
slaves, kings and royal servants are declared to be such as become
purified instantaneously.’

*Vṛddha-Parāśara* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 616).—‘There is no impurity for
kings, or for religious students, persons engaged in sacrificial
sessions, persons initiated for a sacrifice, and all those for whom the
king wishes it There is no impurity due to birth or death, for those
engaged in penance or charity.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 617.).—‘The Kṣatriya engaged in battle, the Vaiśya
seated among cows, the Brāhmaṇa engaged in a sacrificial session and the
religious student are always pure.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity during marriage or sacrifice
or trouble or journey or pilgrimage.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘In the installation of a god’s image, in the
performance of a communal sacrifice, during Śrāddha and such rites, or
during *Pitṛyajña*, or in the giving away of the daughter,—there is no
impurity.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity due to birth or death on three
occasions—during a sacrificial performance, during marriage and during a
sacrifice to gods.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 919).—‘After the Initiatory Ceremony at a
sacrifice, and during the performance of the *Kṛcchra* and other
penances, there is no impurity, even on the death of the father. The
impurity comes after the completion of the performance and lasts for
three days. So also for religious students.’

*Jābāla* (Do., p. 920).—‘For the religious student, the king, the
ascetic, the artist, the initiated person, during a sacrifice or
marriage or a sacrificial session,—there is no impurity,’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘For the priest who has accepted the Honey-mixture
in connection with a sacrificial performance, if a cause for impurity
arises, it dues not apply to him. So also for the person who has been
initiated for a sacrifice, till the Final Bath. Nor is there any
impurity for the calm ascetic firm in Vedānta, etc., etc.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

093	The taint of impurity does not fall on kings, and those engaged in the performance of a vow, or of a Sattra; for the (first are) seated on the throne of Indra, and the (last two are) ever pure like Brahman.
</details>
