+++
title = "094 राज्ञो महात्मिके"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Immediate purification has been ordained for the king on the majestic throne; and the reason for this lies in his occupying that position for the protection of the people.—(93).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

महान् आत्मा यस्य स्थानस्य तन् **माहात्मकम्** । यस्मिं स्थाने स्थितस्य पुंसः प्रजानां परिरक्षा । **माहात्म्यं** तद् एवोच्यते । तच् च प्रजैश्वर्यम् । यद् आह- **आसनं चात्र कारणम्** इति । तद् उक्तम्- नात्र जातिमात्रम्, किं तु प्रजापालनाधिकारः । **आसन**शब्दो ऽपीह नासनशय्यादिवचनः, अपि तु तत्पदं प्राप्तवतो यत् कर्तव्यं तद् आह । अतः अक्षत्रियो ऽपि यदि प्रजापालने समर्थः तस्याप्य् आशौचाभाव एव पूर्वैर् व्याख्यातः । **प्रजानां परिरक्षार्थम्** इति । न सर्वेण सर्वाशौचनिवृत्तिः, किं तर्हि, प्रजापालनविरोधि यदाशौचधारणं तन् निवर्तते । यथा दुर्भिक्षादौ स्वकोशाद् अन्नदानेन प्रजाभरणम्, तथा दिव्यान्तरिक्षभौमेषूत्पातेषु[^२२३] शान्तिः । अकस्मात् सभ्यैः कर्तव्येन राज्ञा, अथ वा आश्रमेषु[^२२४] द्विजातीनां धर्मसंशयसत्त्वेन, प्रथमेज्यादाव् अप्य् अस्ति प्रवक्तृत्वम्, तद् अपि प्रयोजनम् ॥ ५.९३ ॥


[^२२४]:
     M: śrameṣu; G 1st ed.: sameṣu


[^२२३]:
     M G J: divyantarikṣa-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Majestic*’—*i.e*., that seat whose character is grand, glorious; this
‘majesty’ consists in the fact that it is seated upon this throne that
the man is enable to carry on the work of protecting the people; and
herein lies his sovereignty over men. This is what is meant by the
clause—‘*and the reason for this lies in his occupying that position*’;
and what this means is that mere caste does not entitle the man to the
consideration that the rule implies; what entitles him to it is his work
of protecting the people. The term ‘*āsana*’, ‘*position*,’ also does
not mean here a *seat* or a *couch*; it stands for the duties incumbent
upon one who takes his seat upon it. It is for this reason that the
older writers have explained the present rule to mean that there is no
impurity in the case of any person who is capable of protecting the
people, even if he be a *non-Kṣatriya* by caste.

‘*For the purpose of protecting the people*.’—The meaning of this is
that all the observances relating to impurity are not to cease, but only
those that would be incompatible with the proper fulfilment of his duty
of protecting the people; for example, the giving of food-grains out of
his granary during times of scarcity, and so forth, the performance of
rites for the allaying of celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial
portents. Further, it becomes incumbent upon the king to attend to such
business as may be brought up suddenly by gentlemen; or, when it becomes
necessary for him to speak out for the purpose of settling disputes and
religious doubts that may arise among twice-born persons in the higher
stages of life.—(93).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 94 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.27), in support of the view,
that the rule that ‘no impurity attaches to the king’ holds only with
regard to such acts of making gifts, receiving and honouring people and
hearing suits as are essential for the safety of the people; and it does
not apply to the performance of the ‘Five Great Sacrifices’ and other
religious acts.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 616);—in *Śuddhikaumudī*
(p. 70), which explains ‘*māhātmika sthāna*’ as the *seat of judgement*,
in connection with which there can be no impurity;—and in *Hāralatā* (p.
110) which explains the meaning to be ‘for the king who is occupying
*the position of God, the Lord of all things*’, ‘*māhātmikasthāna*’,
there is immediate purification,—not so for one who has lost his
kingdom; as the ground for the immediate cessation of impurity lies in
the fact that he occupies the judgment seat when he comes to the work of
administering justice and protecting the people.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.47).—(Same as Manu.)

(See above for other texts.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

094	For a king, on the throne of magnanimity, immediate purification is prescribed, and the reason for that is that he is seated (there) for the protection of (his) subjects.
</details>
