+++
title = "112 निर्लेपङ् काञ्चनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A golden vessel, free from stains, becomes pure by water alone; so also what is produced in water, what is made of stone and what is made of silver, if it is not enchased (or verse much defiled).—(111).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तैजसविशेषयोः काञ्चनराजतयोर् निर्लेपयोर् अयं विधिः । अन्येषां तु ताम्रादीनां यथोच्छिष्टस्पर्शे धावनाद् इष्टकादिभिः । यत्र[^२४३] क्षीरं वा पानीयं वा पीतं तत्र न भवति लेपः । यत्र मासघृतक्षीरादिभिर् उच्छिष्टैः संश्लिष्यन्त्य् अवयवास् तत्र वक्ष्यति "तस्मात् तयोः स्वयोन्यैव" (म्ध् ५.११२) इति । लेपगन्धापकर्षणवचनाच् च (ग्ध् १.४२) यो लेपो येनैवापक्रष्टुं शक्यते तत्र तद् एवोपादेयम्, न भस्मवारिणी एव । तथा च हारीतः- "गोधूमकुष्ठककलाययवमुद्गमसूरचूर्णैः[^२४४]" इत्यादि पठति । एवं "श्वचाण्डालोदक्यादिस्पर्शे तु निर्लेपयोर् अपि भस्मना त्रिःसप्तकृत्वः परिमार्जनम्" इति  हारीतः । शङ्खस् तु "तैजसानां कुणपरुधिररेतोमूत्रपुरीषोपहतानाम् आवर्तनम् उल्लेखनं भस्मना वा त्रिःसप्तकृत्वः परिमार्जनम्" इति । तत्र चिरकालमूत्रादिवासितानाम् आवर्तनम् । नामाकृतिम् उपमृद्येच्छातस् तदाकृतिसंपादनम् आवर्तनम् । उल्लेखनं तीक्ष्णेन शस्त्रेणाश्मना वा निघर्षः । 


[^२४४]:
     M G: godhūmamakuṣṭhaka-


[^२४३]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: yatra

- स्मृत्यन्तरे त्व् आकरदाहावचूलनान्य्[^२४५] आम्नातानि । तत्र सुवर्णकारैर् वर्णीकृतस्य शुद्धिः आकरः[^२४६] । दाहः अग्नौ सुवर्णकारैर् निष्ठापनम् । अवचूलनं दाहोन्नोतानां[^२४७] सुवर्णकाराणां सुवर्णघनभाण्डे तेन सर्वत अहननं तस्मिन् वर्णाकरे[^२४८] । तथा चोक्तम् "आकराः शुचयः सर्वे" (ब्ध् १.९.३) इति । 


[^२४८]:
     M G 1st ed.: svarṇākāre; G 2nd ed: svarṇākare


[^२४७]:
     M G: dāho nātītānāṃ (G 2nd ed. nānnītānāṃ)


[^२४६]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: ākaraḥ


[^२४५]:
     M G 1st ed.: ākāra-

- **अब्जं** शङ्खस्फटिकादि[^२४९] । शङ्खस्य तु सलेपस्य गौरसर्षपकल्केन गोमूत्रोदकाभ्यां क्षीरेण च । स्मृत्यन्तरे हि पठ्यते "अद्भिः शङ्खस्य" इति, "क्षीरोदकाभ्यां गौरसर्षपकल्केनोच्छिष्टस्नेहयुक्तस्य" इति । 


[^२४९]:
     M G 1st ed.: śaṅkhasphoṭanādi; G 2nd ed.: abjaṃ śaṅkhādi aśmamayaṃ sphaṭikādi

- **अनुपस्कृतम्** अखातपूरितम्, अथ वात्यन्तानुपहतम् । सर्वशेषश् चायम् । तेन शुष्कामेध्यचण्डालादिस्पर्शे सत्य् अपि निर्लेपत्वे प्राक्प्रदर्शितैव शाखान्तरीया शुद्धिः ॥ ५.१११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This rule applies to two particular metals, gold and silver, when they
are free from stains; as for other metals, copper and the rest, their
cleansing is to be done with washing with powdered bricks and such
things, just as in the case of their bring defiled by leavings of food.
There is no stain in a vessel in which milk or water has been drunk. As
regards the case where parts of the vessel become stained by the
leavings of meat, butter, milk and such things, the author is going to
lay down distinct means of cleansing—‘By that from which they sprang
&c.’ (113). Then again, since the text has spoken of the removal of
‘smells and stains’, we should make use of such cleansing substances as
may be capable of removing a particular stain; and it is not necessary
to make use of ash and water in all cases. Hārīta mentions several such
cleansing substances, as ‘powdered wheat, rice, peas, barley,
kidney-bean and lentil’; and he proceeds to say—‘even when gold and
silver vessels are not stained, if they have been touched by a Cāndāla,
or by a menstruating woman, they should be cleaned with ash twenty-one
times.’

Śaṅkha however has declared thus—‘Of metal vessels defiled by a dead
body or blood or semen or urine or ordure, there should be either
alteration or scrubbing or washing twenty-one times with ash’. There
should be ‘alteration’ in the case of vessels long immersed in urine
&c.; ‘alteration’ means the destruction of the original name and form
and the bringing about of another shape and name;—‘scrubbing’ means
scratching with a sharp weapon or with stone.

Another Smṛti-text has prescribed’ (l) melting, (2) heating and (3)
hammering.’—When the vessel has been put into the melting-pot by the
goldsmith, it becomes pure ‘burning’, *i.e*., being pat into fire by
goldsmiths ‘hammering *i.e*., heating and then placing on the anvil and
hammering, in the melting-pot it bring declared that ‘all mines are
pure.’

‘*What is produced out of water*’—the conch-shell, the rock-crystal and
the like. For the *stained* conch-shell there is purification by the
paste of white mustard, or by cow’s-urine and water, or by milk. We read
in another *Smṛti*—‘The couch-shell is purified by water; if it is
defiled and oily, then by milk and water, and by the paste of white
mustard.’

‘*Anupaskṛtam*’ ‘*enchased*’, *i.e*., the chasings in which are not
filled (with unclean things), not very much defiled. This goes with
every one of the things mentioned; hence in the case of every one of
these being defiled with the touch of dry unclean things or of the
caṇḍāla and the like,—even though there be no stain,—the purification is
to be as described before, in accordance with other Smṛti-texts.—(111).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 112 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 446), which explains
‘*anupaskṛtam*’ as ‘*not chased*’, *i.e*., ‘the chasings whereof do not
retain any such unclean thing as wine, food leavings and so forth’;—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 805);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 134),
which explains ‘*anupaskṛtam*’ as ‘unsoiled,’ and ‘*abjam*’ as ‘the
conch and such things’;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*, (Śrāddha, p. 15b);—in
*Aparārka*, (p. 254), which explains ‘*anupaskṛtam*’ as ‘the chasings
wherein are not filled with copper or other metals’;—in *Mitākṣarā*, (on
1.193), which explains ‘*anupaskṛtam*’ as ‘*akhātapūritam*’ (the term
used by Medhātithi), *i*. *e*., ‘the chasings in which are not filled
in’;—in *Nityācārapradīpa*, (p. 96), which explains ‘*nirlepam*’ as
absolutely unsoiled;—and in *Śuddhikaumudī*, (p. 305), which explains
‘*abja*’ as ‘conches, shells and the like,’—‘*ca*’ as including
glass-vessels, and ‘*anupaskṛtam*’ as ‘not chased or otherwise
modified.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 5.111-112)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1.8, 33, 46, 47).—‘Copper, silver and gold must be
cleansed with acids,—conch-shells, horn, pearl-shell and ivory, with a
paste of yellow mustard; or they may he cleansed with milk.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.61, 62).—‘Gold is purified by fire alone; likewise
silver.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.7).—‘Objects made of gold, silver, shells, or gems, when not
smeared, are cleansed with water.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.182).—(See above, under 110.)

*Parāśara* (7.25-30).—‘Iron things are cleansed by being scrubbed with
iron; lead by heating in fire; vessels made of ivory, bone, horn, silver
and gold, as also gems, stones and conch-shells, one should wash with
water; in stone however, scrubbing also should be done; earthenware is
cleansed by heating in fire; grains by water sprinkled on them; things
made of bamboo, tree-bark, linen, cotton cloth and woolen cloth, are
purified by washing. For *muñja* grass and things made of it, winnowing
basket, jute, fruits and leather, grasses, wood and ropes, sprinkling
with water has been prescribed. Cotton-beds and pillows, red-coloured
cloths and the ? become pure by being dried over fire and then sprinkled
with water.’

*Mārkaṇḍeyapurūṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 134).—‘Vessels and men are
purified by water; metal things are cleansed by washing with water and
scrubbing with stone.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

112	A golden vessel which shows no stains, becomes pure with water alone, likewise what is produced in water (as shells and coral), what is made of stone, and a silver (vessel) not enchased.
</details>
