+++
title = "115 द्रवाणाञ् चैव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For all liquids, purification has been declared to consist in throwing out a little; for solids, in sprinkling; and for wooden articles, in scraping.—(114).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

क्षरणधर्माणो **द्रवाः** घृततैलोदश्वित्प्रभृतयः । तेषां च काकाद्युच्छिष्टानां प्रस्थमात्रपरिमाणानाम् **उत्पवनं** कस्यचिद् अंशस्यापनयनं पूर्वभागस्थितस्य । स्मृत्यन्तरे त्व् एवम् आम्नातम्- "कुशाग्राभ्यां पवमानः सुवर्जनः" इत्यनुवाकेन (म्स् ३.११.१०) । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> प्लावनम् उत्पवनम् आहुः- अन्यत् समानजातीयं तावद् आसिच्यते यावत् पूर्णे भाण्डे काश्चिन् मात्रा अवस्रवन्ति । 

- साक्षाद् उपघात एतत् । अल्पानां त्याग एव । भाण्डोपघाते तु पात्रान्तरनयनम् । उच्छिष्टसंस्पर्शे तु तैलसर्पिषी उदके ऽवधाय जपेद् इत्य् उक्तम् । तत्रार्थात् पात्रोत्क्षेपः । न हि तैलस्य उदके क्षिप्तस्य पात्ररहितस्योपयोगः संभवति । साहचर्यात् घृतस्यापि । एतच् चोत्पवनं द्रवाणाम् । यत्र[^२५०] मद्यामेध्यसंसर्गकृतौ गन्धवर्णौ न दृश्येते । तयोस् तु सत्योस् त्याग एव । सर्वं चैतद् बौधायनस्मृतौ परिगृहीतम् (ब्ध् १.८.३२–५३) । पक्वानां तु द्रव्याणां पुनःपाको ऽपि शङ्खेनाम्नातः । सर्वेषां ये ऽप्य् अमेध्या मद्यादयस् तेषाम् अप्य् एषैव शूद्रादीन् प्रति शुद्धिः । अत्र तूत्पवनं प्लावनम् एव । यथा वसिष्ठेनोक्तम् "भूमिष्ठानां तूदकवत्" ।


[^२५०]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: yatra

- **संहता** कठिनाः, शीतं घृतं आमिक्षागुडपर्पटकादयः । तेषां यः प्रदेश उपहतस् तम् अपनीय शेषस्य शुद्धिः । उक्तं च शङ्खेन- "शुष्काणाम् उद्धृतदोषाणाम्" इति । <u>अथ वा</u> समुदायाद् अवयविनः संहताः, शयनासनसरणादयः सजातीयविजातीयद्रव्यसंघातात्मकाः । "उद्धृतदोषाणाम्" इति सर्वत्र द्रष्टव्यम् । शवशुष्कामेध्यसंसर्गेषु यः प्रदेशो वृत्तसंसर्गस् तस्य प्रक्षालनम् अवशिष्टस्य प्रोक्षणम् ।

- **दारवाणां** केवलदारुकृतानां बृसीफलकादीनां काष्ठमयानां च शवचण्डालपुरीषसंसर्गे **तक्षणम्** । <u>अन्ये</u> तु पुरीषसंसर्ग एवेच्छन्ति । तक्षणेन गन्धलेपाद्यपनेतव्यम् । अवशिष्टस्य मृद्वारिभ्यां प्रक्षालनं प्रोक्षणं वा । श्वाद्युपघाते तु प्रक्षालनम् एव पुरीषवत् । खट्वाशय्यादीनां च दारुचर्मसूत्रघटितानां संहतत्वेन शुद्धिः ॥ ५.११४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Liquids*’—Substances that have the tendency to *flow*; *e.g*.,
clarified butter, oil, gruel and so forth; when small quantities of
these,—not more than a seer—are defiled by the cow and other
things,—their purification is done by means of, ‘*utpavana*’,—*i.e*.,
the removal or throwing away, of a portion of the original contents. In
another *Smṛti-text* it has been declared as follows:—‘Utpavana is done
by means of two blades of Kuśa, with the hymn—‘*pavamānaḥsuvarjanaḥ*,
&c.’

Others have explained ‘*utpavana*’ to mean ‘make to overflow’; the
meaning being that another similar substance is to be poured into the
defiled liquid till the vessel becomes filled to overflowing and a
portion of the liquid flows out.

What is here prescribed is to be done in the case of direct
contamination.

In the case of small quantities, the liquid has to be thrown away.

When, on the other hand, it is the vessel that is contaminated—and there
is no direct defilement of the liquid itself—it should be removed into
another vessel. In the case of liquids becoming contaminated by the
contact of food-leavings, it has been declared ‘clarified butter should
be placed in water and Vedic mantras recited’; and it is clear that the
things have to be poured into another vessel, which latter is to be
placed in water; for if the oil itself were placed in water, it would
not remain fit for use. Similarly in the case of clarified butter also.

The said ‘*utpavana*’ is meant for *liquids*. But when liquids come into
contact with urine and other unclean things, to this extent that their
own odour and colour cease to be perceptible,—they have to be thrown
away.

As regards such liquids as have been boiled, Śaṅkha has prescribed
*re-boiling* also.

This same purification pertains to even urine and other unclean liquids,
when they are to be used by the Śūdra and others. But in this case
‘*utpavana*’ would mean only ‘overflowing’. As Vaśiṣṭha has said—‘for
things on the ground it is like water’.

^(‘)*Solids*’—hard substances; such as cooled clarified butter, curds,
sugar-candy, cakes and the like. In the ease of these, if the portion
that is defiled is thrown away, the remainder becomes purified. Śaṅkha
has declared—‘In the case of dry substances, by the removal of
contamination’.

Or, the term ‘*saṃhatāḥ*’ may stand for things composed of several
components; such as, couch, seat, bed and the like, which are
composites, composed of homogeneous as well as heterogeneous
constituents.

But in all cases, purification is obtained by the removal of
contamination.

In the case of contact with a dead body, or with unclean things that
have dried up, that part which has come into direct contact with such
things is to be washed and the rest of the thing is to be sprinkled with
water.

In the case of *wooden articles*—*i.e*., things made of wood only, such
us a scat, a board and the like made of wood—if these are contaminated
by the touch of a dead body, or a *cāṇḍāla* or Śūdra,—there should be
*scraping*.

Others hold that scraping is to be done only when the thing touches
*Ordure*; in which case, the stain and the smell have got to be removed
by scraping, and the rest of the thing is to be washed and sponged with
clay and water.

On contamination by a dog and such things, there should be washing, as
in the case of *ordure*.

In the case of the wooden bed and such things made up of wood and ropes
&c (and not of wood *only*), purification is secured as in the ease of
‘solids’ or ‘composites’.—(114).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 115 of others.)

‘*Utpavanam*’—‘Throwing away of a portion’ (Medhātithi);—‘pouring
another liquid into the vessel to overflowing, so that some of the
original contents flow out’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi);—‘passing through
it of two blades of kuśa-grass’ (Kullūka, Govindarāja and
Rāghavānanda);—‘straining through cloth’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.190), which explains
‘*utpavanam*’ as ‘pouring over a piece of cloth so that foreign source
of impurity may be strained out—and in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 297) which,
reading ‘*utplavanam*’, explains it as ‘removing the insect or such
other foreign substances by straining the liquid through cloth’;—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 805);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*, (Śrāddha, p. 16a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (1.29).—(See under 110.)

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.35).—‘Objects made of wood must be planed.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.26).—‘Wooden vessels touched by impure men shall be
scraped.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.14.16, 17).—‘Sour milk and preparations of milk arc
purified by pouring them from one vessel into another; in like manner,
let him pour oil and clarified butter, which have been touched by impure
persons, into water, and then use them.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.12).—‘A wooden vessel becomes pure by being scraped.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.49).—‘Objects made of wood should be planed.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.27, 29, 30).—‘Wooden articles, by planing; many things in a
heap by sprinkling water; liquids by straining.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.190).—(See above, under 153.) (See other texts under
113.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

115	The purification prescribed for all (sorts of) liquids is by passing two blades of Kusa grass through them, for solid things by sprinkling (them with water), for (objects) made of wood by planing them.
</details>
