+++
title = "118 अद्भिस् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Of grains and cloth, in large quantities, there is sprinkling with water; and in small quantities, their purification has been ordained to be secured by means of washing with water.—(117).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

बहुत्वं धान्यानां द्रोणाधिक्ये स्मर्यते । <u>अन्ये</u> तु पुरुषापेक्षया देशकालापेक्षया च वर्णयन्ति । कस्यचिद् दुर्गतस्य कुडवार्धम् अपि बहु भवति । तथा कस्यांचिद् अवस्थायां वर्धितकोशो बहुताम् एति । तथाह बौधायनः- 

- देशं कालं तथात्मानं द्रव्यं द्रव्यप्रयोजनम् । 

- उपपत्तिम् अवस्थां तु ज्ञात्वा शुद्धिं प्रयोजयेत् ॥ (ब्ध् १.८.५३) 

एवं वासःस्व् अपि केचिद् आहुः- "त्रिभ्य ऊर्ध्वं बहूनि" । यद्य् अपि त्रिप्रभृतिषु बहुत्वम्, यतः "**अल्पानाम्**" इति बहुवचनं श्रुतम्, अतस् त्रिपर्यन्तान्य् अल्पानि । 

- **अद्भिर्** इत्य् उपलक्षणम् । तेन यस्य वाससो येनैव दोषसंसर्गो व्यपैति तद् अपि द्रष्टव्यम् । तच् च प्राग् दर्शितम् । प्रोक्षणसंबन्धो ऽब्ग्रहणनियमार्थः । उदकेनैव प्रोक्षणं कर्तव्यम् । एतेनैव च भेदेन द्विःपाठः । 

- एतच् च महत्य् उपघाते शवपुरीषचाण्डालादिस्पर्शे । अन्यथा <u>त्व् अल्पानाम्</u> इति प्रोक्षणम् एव । 

- यदि प्रक्षालितस्यापि[^२५१] लेपादि वाससो नापैति तदा तन्मात्रच्छेदनम् "उत्सर्गो वा" (ग्ध् १.३४) इति गौतमेनोक्तम् ॥ ५.११७ ॥


[^२५१]:
     M G 1st ed.: paryavasyato
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Grains are declared as to be regarded to be ‘in large quantities’ when
they are more than one ‘*droṇa*’ in weight (about thirty-two seers).
Others hold that they are to be regarded as ‘much’ in relation to
particular men and to particular time and place; *e.g*., for one who is
in a poor condition, even a ‘*kudava*’ (a quarter seer) may be ‘much’;
similarly under certain conditions, grain is regarded as ‘much’, only
when there is a large accumulation. Says Baudhāyana (*Dharmasūtra*
1.5.47)—‘One shall employ the method of purification after having duly
considered the place, time, the man himself, the substance, the use to
which ft is going to be put, its origin and condition.’

Some people would apply the same rule to *cloth* also.

Though things have been declared to be ‘many’ when they are three and
more, yet, since the text has used the *plural* number in the term
‘*alpānām*’, ‘*those in s* *mall* *quantities*’, we take it that upto
(and including three), they are to be regarded as of ‘small quantity’.

‘*With water*’ (in the second time)—This is purely illustra tive; hence
the doth is to be washed with that liquid which may be able to remove
the contamination that has defiled it. This has been already explained
before. The term ‘*sprinkling*’ has been used for the purpose of
emphasising the use of water, the sense being that‘the sprinkling is to
be done with *water* only.’ It is on account of this difference that the
term ‘*with water*’ has been used twice.

If even by washing the stain in the cloth does not go, then that much of
it should be cut off, or the whole should be cut off,—as laid down by
Gautama (1-33).—(117).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 118 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.184), which adds that when a
lager portion of the heap is defiled, then the whole lot should be
washed; while if a smaller portion only is defiled, then that small
quantity should be washed;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 453), which adds that
what is indicated by ‘*bahūnām*’ ‘large quantities’, is that quantity
which is more than what can be carried by one man;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Prāyaścitta, p. 136);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 297);—in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 805);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 166);—in
*Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 310);—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*, (p. 248), which
notes that ‘*bahutva*’, ‘largeness of quantity’, is to be determined by
the consideration of what can be carried by one or more men.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Parāśara* (7.28-29).—(Same as Manu.)

*Gautama* (1.29).—(See under 15.)

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.42).—‘Cotton cloth is cleansed by earth.’

*Baudhāyana*—(1.13.11).—‘Clothes defiled by urine, ordure, blood, semen
and the like shall be cleansed with earth, water and the like.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.14.11, 12).—‘If unhusked rice has been defiled, it must
he washed and dried;—hut a large quantity should he sprinkled with
water.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.49).—‘...cloth made of yarns should be washed.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.13, 14, 18).—‘A large quantity of anything is cleansed by
sprinkling water;—so also grain, skins, ropes, woven cloth, things made
of bamboo, thread, cotton and clothes—when there are large quantities of
them; when in small quantities these are cleansed by washing.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.184).—(See under 116.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

118	The manner of purifying large quantities of grain and of cloth is to sprinkle them with water; but the purification of small quantities is prescribed (to take place) by washing them.
</details>
