+++
title = "119 चैलवच् चर्मणाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The method of purifying leather and tree-barks is similar to that of clothes; and for vegetables, roots and fruits, the purification is like that of grains.—(118).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चर्मणाम्** वर्ध्राणां स्पृश्यानाम्, न तु श्वशृगालादिसमन्वितानां स्वभावाशुचीनाम् । उपानत्कवचादीनाम् अपि तद्विकाराणाम् एष एव विधिः । अत्र हि प्रकरणे प्रकृत्यापि विकृतिर् गृह्यते, विकृत्यापि प्रकृतिः । तथा च दारवाणाम् इत्य् अत्र दारूणाम् अप्य् एषैव शुद्धिः । वसिष्ठेन हि दारवाणां शुद्धिम् अभिधाय, "दार्वस्थिभूम्यानि" इत्य् उक्तम् (च्ड़्, वध् ३.५२) । यदि च विकृत्या प्रकृतिर् न गृह्येत तदनुक्तक्शुद्धिविधानेन दारूणां कथम् अतिदेशः क्रियेत । प्रकृतेस् तु विकारग्रहणं तद्बुद्ध्यनपायाद् युक्तम् एव । 

- **वैदलानि** वार्क्षत्वगादीनि । स्मृत्यन्तरे पक्षपवित्रचर्मचामरतृणवेत्रबालवल्कलानाम् एषैव[^२५२] शुद्धिर् विहिता । तत्र मयूरादिपक्षास् तन्निर्वृत्ताश् च छत्रपिच्छिकादयो गृह्यन्ते । पवित्रं दर्भस् तेषां दर्भमयानां च वाससाम् । तृणशब्देन तालपत्राण्य् उच्यन्ते । "तृणराजं विदुस् तालम्" इति स्मर्यते । तत्रैकदेशात् समुदायप्रतिपत्तिर् दत्तशब्दादिवद् देवदत्ते । बाला गवाश्वाजानां न मनुष्याणाम्, तेषां च्युतानाम् अपृश्यत्वात् । 


[^२५२]:
     M G: caityādineṣaiva

- सर्वा चेयं द्रव्यान्तरोपघाते शुद्धिर् उच्यते न स्वभावोपहतौ, चेलधान्ययोर् एकरूप्त्वाच् छुद्देः । **शाकादेर्** धान्यवद् वचनम् । यथा धान्यानाम् अवघातादिसंस्कारान्तररहितानां धान्यावस्थानाम् एव प्रोक्षणप्रक्षालने शुद्धिहेतू तद्वच् छाकादीनाम् अपि । तेनापकवानाम् अयं विधिः । पक्वानां तु सत्य् अपि शाकादिशब्दवाच्यत्वे शुद्ध्यन्तरम् अन्वेषणीयम् । यथोक्तम् "सुवर्णवारिणा पावकज्वालया च" इत्यादि । आकराद् आहृतानां तु शाकादीनाम् उदश्विद्दधिक्षीरादीनां प्रोक्षणपर्यग्निकरणे विशेषतो हारीतेनाम्नाते । तथा शिम्बीधान्यानाम् उद्घर्षणदलनपेषणादि । एतच् च पादस्पर्शे शङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थम् । तद् उक्तम् "आकराः शुचयः सर्वे" (ब्ध् १.९.३) इति ॥ ५.११८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Leather*’,—*i.e*., goat-skins and such other skins as are touchable;
and not the skin of the dog, the jackal or such animals as are by their
nature unclean.

The same rule holds good regarding also things made of the said leather,
in the shape of shoes, armour and the like.

In the present context, wherever Che original constituent cause is
mentioned, it includes the product also; and *vice versa*. So that the
rule laid down in connection with ‘wooden articles’ is applicable to
*wood* also. Vaśiṣṭha, having described the purification of wooden
articles, proceeds to speak of ‘wood, bone and earth’; and if the cause
did not include its product, how could the author apply the purification
(prescribed for *wooden articles*) and not for w *ood* ) to the *wood*?
In fact the inclusion of the product by the cause is only right, since
the notion of the latter does not certainly cease in regard to the
former.

‘*Vaidala*’ stands for the *bark of trees* and other like things.

In another *Smṛti-text* this same purification in laid down for
feathers, *kuśa*, skins, *chowries*, grass, cane, hair, and
tree-bark’—Here ‘feather’ stands for the *peacock’s feathers*, and
things made of them, such as umbrellas, hair ornaments and so forth;—the
term ‘*pavitra*’ stands for *kuśa*, and also for doth made of
*kuśa*;—the term ‘*grass*’ stands for *palm-leaves*; according to the
assertion that ‘the palm is known as the *king among plants*’; and the
part of the wood (*i.e*., ‘*ṭrna*’, which is part of ‘*tṛṇarāja*’)
denotes the whole, like the term ‘*deva*’ denoting the name
‘*Devadatta*’;—‘*hairs*’—*i.e*., of the cow, the horse and the goat, not
of man; as the latter, when fallen from the body, are untouchable; for
in the present context all the purification mentioned pertains to cases
where a thing has been defiled by the touch of another substance, and
not where the thing is unclean by its very nature; that this is so is
indicated by the fact that exactly the same purification has been laid
down for cloth and grain.

Vegetables have to be dealt with in the same manner as grains. That is
just as *sprinkling* and *washing* are the means of purifying grains,
while they are still in the form of grains, and have not undergone
embellishment by means of *thumping* and the like acts,—so also are they
for the purifying of vegetables also. Hence the present rule pertains to
*uncooked* vegetables only. As for *cooked* vegetables, even though they
are spoken of as ‘vegetables’, yet some other method of purification has
to be found for them; as it has been said—‘by clean water and by the
flame of fire’ and be forth. For vegetables taken out of large heaps, as
also for gruel, cow’s milk and the rest, *sprinkling* and *heating on
fire* hate been specially laid down by Hārīta;—and similarly, for all
grains in pods, scrubbing and pounding and so forth.

All this is for the purpose of removing all doubts in the event of their
being touched by foot, as it has been said that ‘all things in large
quantities are pure.’—(118).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 119 of others.)

‘*Vaidalānām*’—‘Objects made of the bark of trees and such things’
(Medhātithi and Govindarāja);—‘made of split bamboo’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 139);—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 805);—and in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 311) which
explains ‘*Vaidalānām*’ as ‘things made of split bamboo’, which are
purified like cloth,—and ‘*dhānyavat*’ as ‘large quantities by
sprinkling water and small quantities by washing’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (1.33).—‘Ropes, bamboo-chips, and leather are cleansed like
garments.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.36, 38, 43).—‘Objects made of bamboo should be
cleansed with cow-dung—skins of black deer with *bel*, nut and rice.
Other skins shall he treated like cotton- cloth.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.13).—‘Deer-skins are cleansed like garments made of
bark.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.53).—‘Ropes, bamboo-chips and leather are cleansed like
cloth.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.14, 15, I8).—‘Grain, skins, ropes, woven cloth, things made
of bamboo, thread, cotton, clothes are cleansed by sprinkling
water;—also pot-herbs, roots, fruits and flowers. When in small
quantities, they are cleansed by washing.’ *Yājñavalkya* (1.182).—(See
under 110.)

*Parāśara* (7.29).—‘Things made of *Muñja grass*, winnowing baskets,
roots, fruits and skins—as also of grass and wood and ropes, should be
sprinkled with water.’

*Vyāsa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 140).—‘Cloth is purified by earth and
water; as also ropes and bamboo-chips. If ropes and other things are
very much defiled, just that portion should be thrown away which has
been defiled.’

*Uśanas* (Do.).—‘Roots, fruits, flowers, land, grass, wood, straw, and
grains should be sprinkled with water.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

119	Skins and (objects) made of split cane must be cleaned like clothes; vegetables, roots, and fruit like grain;
</details>
