+++
title = "122 प्रोक्षणात् तृण-काष्ठम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Grass and wood and straw become pure by sprinkling; the house by sweeping and sprinkling; and an earthen pot by re-baking.—(121).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

व्रीह्यादिकाण्डं स्रस्तरादिप्रयोजनं **पलालम्** । **तृणानि** कुशशाद्वलादीनि ।

- <u>ननु</u> च दारवाणाम् इत्य् अत्र विकृतिः प्रकृतेर् ग्राहिकेत्य् उक्तम् । किमर्थं काष्ठग्रहणम् ।

- <u>नियमार्थम्</u>, प्रोक्षणम् एव । तेन यावन् न महान् उपघातस् तावद् दारूणि न[^२५४] तक्ष्यन्ते । चण्डालादिस्पर्शे तु "सोमसूर्यांशुमारुतैः" (य्ध् १.१९३) इत्य् अनेनैव शुद्धिः । तद्विकारणां तु दर्व्यादीनां प्रक्षालनतक्षणे स्वल्पोपघाते ऽन्नाद्युपयोगिनां कर्तव्ये । 


[^२५४]:
     M G omit: na

- **मार्जनं** शोधनं गृहस्य दूमांधकाराद्यपनयनम् । **उपाञ्जनं** सुधागोमयादिभिर् भूमिविलेपनम् । एतच् च शवचण्डालोदक्यादिभिर् भित्तिसंस्पर्शे व्यापिनि द्रष्टव्यम् । अव्याप्तौ तु तावन्मात्रस्यैव । ऊर्ध्वं शवोपघाते तु भित्तितक्षणं सूर्यरश्म्यनुप्रवेशो ऽग्निज्वालाभिमर्शनम् । क्वचित् पुनर् नवीकरणम् इत्यादिपठितं संमार्जनम् । 

- **मृन्मयानां पुनःपाकः** । पर्यग्निकरणम् उच्छिष्टपुरुषसंस्पर्शादौ द्रष्टव्यम् । पुनःपाकस् तु मद्यभाण्डादिसंस्पर्शे द्रष्टव्यः । साक्षात्स्पर्शे तु त्याग एव । यथोक्तम् 

- मद्यैर् मूत्रपुरीषैर् वा ष्ठीवनैः पूयशोणितैः ।

- संस्पृष्टं नैव शुध्येत पुनःपाकेन मृन्मयम् ॥ इति । (वध् ३.५९)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Palāla*’, ‘*straw*,’ is the name applied to corn-stalks used in the
making of mats and such other things

‘*Grass*’,—*i.e*., *kuśa*, ordinary grass, and so forth.

“In connection with the mention of ‘wooden articles’ (114), it has been
remarked that the mention of the *product* implies the *cause* also;
under the circumstances, why should ‘wood’ be mentioned in the present
verse?”

It is mentioned for the purpose of emphasising the fact that
*sprinkling* alone is what should be done. And it is in virtue of this
that until the cause contamination is very serious, people do not have
recourse to scraping the wood. In the event of its being touched fay the
Cāṇḍala and such unclean persons, the purification is brought about ‘by
means of the rays of the sun, of the moon and. wind’; but in the case of
things made of wood,—such as the ladle and the like,—if the
contamination is slight, people desirous of using them in connection
with food &c., should have recourse to sprinkling and scraping.

‘*Sweeping*’—is the dealing of the house, which consists in removing of
the stains of smoke and such things.

‘*Smearing*’—*i.e*., rubbing the floor with cow-dung, lime or some such
thing.

All this should be understood to be necessary in the ‘case of the whole
wall of the house becoming defiled by the touch of a dead body, *a
cāṇḍala*, a menstruating woman and such persons; while in the case of
only a portion of the wall being defiled, only that part should be
*smeared*. Bat in the case of defilement by a dead body falling on the
roof, walls should be scraped, rays of the sun should be made to enter
the house, and the inside should be exposed to flames of fire; and in
some cases *re-building* also has been laid down. All this comes under
the term ‘*clearing*’.

Of earthen articles, there should be ‘*re-baking*’. That is, when it has
been touched by a man with unwashed mouth, it shall be heated on fire;
actual *rebaking* is to be done only in the case of its bring defiled by
such undean things as a *wine-keg* and the like. When however it is
touched by the wine itself, it should be thrown away. This is what has
been thus declared by Vaśiṣṭha (3.59)—‘An earthen article is not
purified by rebaking, if it has been touched by wine, mine, ordure,
spittings, pus and blood’.—(121).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 122 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 805;—in
*Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 100);—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (pp. 311 and 306);—and
in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 83), which explains ‘*upāñjanam*’ as
‘smearing’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (23.56).—‘A house is purified by scouring it with a broom, and
smearing the ground with cow-dung, and a book by sprinkling water over
it. Land is cleansed by smearing it with cow-dung.’

*Gautama* (1.29).—‘Metals should he scoured; things made of clay should
be thoroughly heated by fire; those of wood should be planed; and cloth
made of yarns should be washed.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.34).—‘Earthen vessels must be heated.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.21-25).—‘Grass placed on unconsecrated ground should
he washed; grass defiled out of one’s sight should he sprinkled; small
pieces of fuel should be purified in the same manner; large pieces of
wood should be washed and dried; but a large quantity of wood should be
sprinkled with water.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.14.1, 2).—‘Earthen vessels touched by impure persons
must he exposed to the fire of *kuśa* grass; those defiled by stains of
food-leavings should be exposed to another burning.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.9, 10).—‘If he eats out of an earthen vessel, he shall
eat out of one that has not been used; if he gets a used vessel, he
shall use it after having heated it thoroughly.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.49, 58).—‘Objects of metal should be scoured with ashes;
those of clay should be thoroughly heated by fire; those of wood should
he planed and cloth made of yarns should be washed. They quote the
following:—“A woman is purified by her courses, a river by its current,
brass by ashes, and an earthen pot by another burning.”’

*Viṣṇu* (23, 16, 18, 33).—‘Grass, fire-wood, dry cow-dung and leaves arc
cleansed by sprinkling of water; these same when defiled without stains,
by washing, when there is a small quantity of them; earthen vessels are
cleansed by a second burning.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.187-188).—‘Earthenware is cleansed by a second burning;
the ground is purified by sweeping, burning and lapse of time, by cows
walking over it, by sprinkling and scraping. The house is cleansed by
sweeping and smearing.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 263).—‘Earthenware smeared with food-leavings
should be washed; those touched by such leavings should be sprinkled.’

*Devala* (Do. 7, p. 265).—‘The ground is cleansed in five ways—by
digging, by burning, by smearing, by washing and by rain.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘The ground is purified in seven ways—by digging, by
filling, by burning, by rain, by smearing, by cows passing over it and
by lapse of time; ground is pure everywhere except whore it bears
perceptible traces of impurity.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do.).—‘When a house has been defiled by the touch of a
corpse, its walls should be scraped, sun’s rays should be made to enter
it and it should be touched by burning fire. Solid ground should be
smeared; that with holes should he ploughed over; wet ground should have
all impurities removed and then covered over.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘When a house has been defiled by the presence of a
dead body in it, all earthen vessels and cooked food should be thrown
away; then it should be smeared with cow-dung, and goats should be made
to smell it, then the whole of it should be sprinkled by Brahmaṇas with
*kuśa* and water.’

*Marīci* (Aparārka, p. 266).—‘If an outcast enter a house, it is
purified by smearing; if he dwells in it, then it should be burnt or
demolished.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

122	Grass, wood, and straw become pure by being sprinkled (with water), a house by sweeping and smearing (it with cowdung or whitewash), an earthen (vessel) by a second burning.
</details>
