+++
title = "125 पक्षि-जग्धङ् गवा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What has been eaten by a bird, what has been smelt by a cow, blown upon, or sneezed at, or defiled by hair and insects, becomes pure by scattering earth.—(123).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत्र जग्धिपदाल् लिङ्गाद् अन्नविषयतास्य श्लोकस्य प्रतीयते । 

- पक्षिभिस् तु शुकादिभिर् अन्यैश् च भक्ष्यैर् यद् अन्नम् उच्छिष्टीकृतम्, न तु काककङ्कगृध्रादिभिः । तत्र हि महत् प्रायश्चित्तम् "पतत्रिणावलीढम्" (म्ध् ४.२०९) इति तद् एतद् उक्तं प्रकृतशुद्धे भोजनप्रायश्चित्तम् । तथा च तत्तुल्यप्रायश्चित्तस्य गवा घ्रातस्य नैव शुद्धिः । भवेद् अयं न्यायः । तथापि स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचाराव् अन्वेष्यौ । एवं हि शिष्टा दशशरावाधिकं काकादिक्रव्यादोपहतं तावन्मात्रम् अपनीयावशिष्टं शोधयित्वोपयुञ्जते अर्वाक् तु तत्[^२५५] त्यजन्ति । अत्राप्य् अवस्थाविशेषो ऽपेक्ष्यः । स्मृत्यन्तरे तु कृष्णशकुनिनोपहतम् अपि निषिद्धम् । 


[^२५५]:
     M G 1st ed.: arvāk tatas

- **अवधूतं** मुखश्वासेनावकम्पितम् । वाससो वा यस्योपरि रजोऽपनयनार्थम् उत्क्षेपणादि क्रियते आकाशदेशात् । **अवक्षुतं** यस्योपरि क्षुतं तद् एव । **केशा** मनुष्याणां च्युताः । **कीटाः** क्षुद्रजन्तवः कृमयः । ते केचिद् गृहस्वेदान्नाद्यजाश् ते जीवन्तो मक्षिकावन् नोपघ्नन्ति । मृतानां तेषाम् अन्नसंस्पर्शे शुद्धिर् इयम् । ये त्व् अमेध्य्संसर्गजास् ते विड्भोजिनश् च, तेषां जीवताम् अपि । गौतमीयम्- "नित्यम् अभोज्यं केशकीटावपन्नम्" इति (ग्ध् १७.८-९) । बहुव्याप्तौ सर्वत्र त्यागः । महाराशाव् अशुचिकीटसंसर्गे ऽपि स्वल्पे तन्मात्रापनयनम् अवशिष्टस्य शुद्धिः । काञ्चनरजतदर्भमणीनां वारिसहितानां स्पर्शः स्मृत्यन्तरे केशाद्यवपन्ने विहितः । अवज्वलनम् अपि क्वचित् । 

- ये तु भूमेर् इमां शुद्धिम् आहुस् तैः स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचारो वाक्यार्थश् च त्यक्तः ॥ ५.१२३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The use of the term ‘eaten’ indicates that the text pertains to *food*.

‘*By birds*’—*i.e*., parrots and other birds that are eatable—what has
been eaten out of (rendered a ‘leaving’). This does not apply to what
may have been eaten by the crow, the vulture and other such birds; as in
connection with this extensive expiatory rites have been prescribed
under the text ‘what has been licked by a bird &c., &c.,’ which lays
down the expiration to be performed in the case of food which, by
itself, is quite pure. Thus it is that there is no purification for food
that has been eaten out of by the cow, in connection with the eating of
which a similar elaborate expiation has been laid down. Though such may
be the law, yet it is necessary to find out other Smṛti-texts and usage
bearing upon the subject. As a matter of fact, when food, larger in
quantity than ten cupfulls, has been defiled by the crow and other such
birds, what cultured people do is to throw away just that portion of it
that has been touched, and make use of the remainder after having
purified it; but if it is less than ten cupfulls, they throw it away.
Here also the peculiar circumstances of each case have to be taken into
consideration.

In another Smṛti-text, food defiled by the black birds has also been
prohibited.

‘*Blown upon*’—with breath from the mouth, or over which a piece of
cloth has been shaken for the purpose of being dusted.

^(‘)*Sneezed at*’—that food on which some one has sneezed.

^(‘)*Hair*’—of men from their heads.—^(‘)*Insects*’—small organisms;
some of these, born out of moisture in the house, if they fall upon the
food while living, they do not defile the food; just as is the case with
flies. The present purification is laid down for the case where *dead*
insects tall on the food. Those insects, on the other hand, that are
born out of impure sources, or which live upon dirt, they defile the
food, even when living. Says Gautama (17.89)—^(‘)What is defiled by hair
and insects is ever uneatable.⁹ When the food happens to be covered by a
large number of these, the whole of it should be thrown away.

In the case of large heaps of food, if a small portion of it happen to
be contaminated by impure insects, that much alone of the food has to be
thrown away and the remainder is purified.

In the case of contamination by hair, another Smṛti has laid down that
the food shall be touched by vessels of gold, silver, *kuśa* and gems,
along with water. In certain works *heating* also has been prescribed.

Some people have taken this verse as laying down a rule for the
purification of *land*. But they go against—(*a*) other Smṛti-texts,
(*b*) usage and (*c*) the direct meaning of the text.—(123).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 125 of others.)

‘*Avodhūtam*’—‘blown upon with the mouth, or blown upon with a piece of
cloth’ (Medhātithi);—‘dusted with cloth’ (Govindarāja);—‘moved by the
wind from a cloth, the foot or the like’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘defiled by the
dust of a broom or of the air moved by the wings of a bird’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 105), which
explains ‘*avadhūtam*’ as ‘touched by the dust raised by the shaking of
a cloth’,—‘*avakṣutam*’ as ‘touched by drops of saliva dropped in
sneezing’;—it adds that if the food has contained hair or insects during
cooking, then it must be thrown away.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 458), which adds that the ‘bird’
here meant is one that is among the *eatable* ones; it explains
‘*avadhūtam*’ as ‘that over which cloth has been shaken’ or ‘that which
has been repeatedly picked up and thrown down by birds’,—‘*avakṣutam*’,
that ‘over which some one has sneezed’;—‘*mṛḍ*’, ‘mud’, includes ‘ash’
and ‘water’ also. It also adds that if the food has been cooked along
with hair or an insect, it has to be thrown away; it has to be purified
by clay, ash or water only if the hair or insect has fallen into it
after it has been cooked.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 827);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Śrāddha, p. 15b);—in *Śudhikaumudī* (p. 314), which says that
‘*pakṣijagdham*’ means, according to Kullūka, ‘eaten by an edible
bird’,—‘*avadhūtam*’ means ‘breathed upon’, and ‘*avakṣutam*’as ‘sneezed
upon’;—in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p. 2), which explains ‘*avodhūtam*’ as ‘over
which cloth has been dusted’;—and in *Smrtisāroddhāra* (p. 244) which
gives the same explanation of ‘*avodhūtam*’ and says that
‘*mṛtkṣepaṇam*’ includes *water-sprinkling* also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (23.38).—‘Food nibbled at by a bird, smelt at by a cow, sneezed
on. or defiled by hair, or bv insects or worms, is purified by earth
scattered over it.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.22-23).—‘Food defiled by contact with a garment, hair or
insects shall not be eaten;—but it may be eaten after taking out the
hair and the insects, sprinkling it with water, dropping ashes on it,
and after it has been declared by the Brahmaṇa to be fit for eating.

*Yājñavalkya* (1.189).—‘Food smelt by the cow, or defiled by hair, flies
or insects, should have water and ashes or earth sprinkled over it, for
purifying it.’

*Baudhāyana* (Aparārka, p. 266).—Blue fly, ordure, insects, bugs are
defilers of food. On seeing hair, insect, nail, etc., in food, that part
of the food where they are found should be thrown away, and the
remainder should have ashes and water sprinkled over it; and it may be
taken, after it has been recommended.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 266).—‘If a fly or hair is found in the food, or if it
is sneezed at or blown upon, one should touch it with ash and then eat
it.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘That food wherein is found an insect that has
touched impure substances.’

*Śātātapa* (Do., p. 267)—‘Food containing hair or insects, or smelt
upon, or defiled by flies, or seen by a newly delivered woman, or by a
woman in her courses, or by a heretic,—is purified in the following
manner: sprinkling water over it, taking out a little of the food, the
rest one may eat. Or he may touch it with ashes or with water, or by
gold and silver.’

*Baudhāyana* (again, Aparārka, p. 267).—‘If cooked sacrificial food is
defiled by crows and other things, the portion defiled should be taken
out. Honey and water become purified by being poured into another
vessel; similarly oil and clarified butter.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘On food being smelt or seen by undesirable persons, or
on its being defiled by the presence of hair or insects, it should be
touched by water, with gold, silver, ashes, copper, emerald, cow’s hair,
deer-skin or *kaśa*,—sprinkled with *mantras*, taken round fire, exposed
to the sun; thus does it become purified.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘Food cooked when exceeding a *Droṇa* in quantity
should not he thrown away, even when defiled by dogs or crows; it should
he offered to Brāhmaṇas and then used according to their advice.’

*Jamadagni* (Do.).—‘Cooked food, one *Droṇa* in weight,—if defiled by
dogs or crows, should have a handful thrown out, and the rest becomes
purified by heating on fire and sprinkling with water;—same with cooked
food enough for lasting one day, when defiled by dogs and crows, or by
the presence of hair and insects.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do., p. 268).—‘Finding skin, hair or nails in the food,
one shall throw about a handful of it, and sprinkling water and
scattering ashes over it, again sprinkling water, one may eat it after
having obtained the recommendation of Brāhmaṇas.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

125	(Food) which has been pecked at by birds, smelt at by cows, touched (with the foot), sneezed on, or defiled by hair or insects, becomes pure by scattering earth (over it).
</details>
