+++
title = "127 त्रीणि देवाः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The gods ordained three things pure for the Brāhmaṇas: what is not seen, what is washed with water and what is commended by word.—(125).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पवित्राणि** शुद्धानि । **देव**ग्रहणं स्तुतिः । **ब्राह्मण**ग्रहणम् अपि समाचारात्[^२५६] सर्ववर्णार्थम् । **अदृष्टं** यद् अनारक्षप्रदेशस्थं द्रव्यम् अदृष्टश्वकाकादिसंसर्गं[^२५७] । न च सद्भावमात्रेण तदुपघाताशङ्का निष्प्रमाणिका कर्तव्या । एवं महानसादौ सूदादिभिर् अकृतशौचैर् व्यवहर्द्भिः पाक्यं द्रव्यम् अदृष्टं परिभोक्तुं न दुष्यति । 


[^२५७]:
     M G: aduṣṭa-


[^२५६]:
     M G add: tat

- न पुनर् इयम् आशङ्का कर्तव्या- उत्तरकाले तत् प्राग् अविज्ञातोपघाते न दोषः । तथा हि "अमतयैतानि च" (म्ध् ५.२०) इत्यादि विरुध्येत । एवं तावद् यत्र दोषसंबन्धो न केनचित् प्रमाणेनावगम्येत तच् छुद्धम् । यत्र पुनर् असत्य् अपि निश्चायके प्रमाणे कुतर्केण संभव्यते तत्राद्भिर् निर्णेक्तव्यम् । यथा समानदेशस्थालीपीठरादि श्वकाकादिभिर् उपहन्यमानं दृष्टम्, अन्यद् अदृष्टम् अप्य् अद्भिर् निर्णेक्तव्यम् । 

- तथैवंविधम् एव **वाचा प्रशंसनीयम्** । शुद्धम् एतद् अस्त्व् इति शिष्टा वाचयितव्याः । ब्राह्मणवचनाच् छुद्धिर् भव्तीत्य् आहुः । **प्रशस्यत** इति लड् अयं विधौ द्रष्टव्यः । 

- <u>ये त्व् आहुर्</u> दृष्टोपघातं यत् तस्य व्यवहर्त्रा साक्षाच् छुद्धौ क्रियमाणायाम् अदृष्टायाम् शिष्टाश् चेद् आहुः- "कृतम् अस्य शौचम्" इति, तत्र प्रत्येतव्यम् इति वाक्प्रशस्तस्यार्थः । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । आप्तवचनस्य सर्वत्रैवाप्रामान्यस्यानङ्गीकृतत्वात् पौनरुक्त्यप्रसङ्गः । 

- <u>अन्ये त्व्</u> **अद्भिर् निर्णिक्तम्** इति दृष्टान्ततया व्याख्यानयन्ति । अदृष्टवाक्प्रशस्ते विधीयेते । यथाद्भिर् निर्णिक्तं शुद्धम् एवम् अदृष्टं वाक्प्रशस्तं विधीयते । 

- <u>ननु</u> च यद्य् अदृष्टदोषं प्रत्यक्षानुमानागमैः शुद्धं, तत् कथं "संवत्सरस्यैकम् अपि" (म्ध् ५.२१) इति ।

- भक्ष्यविषयं तत् । स्पृश्यविषया शुद्धिर् इयम् । गुरुलघुतया वा, आपदनापद्भेदेन वा व्यवस्था ॥ ५.१२५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pavitram*’—pure.

The mention of the gods is by way of commendation.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ includes, according to usage, all castes.

‘*What is not seen*’;—a thing that, though lying in an unprotected
place, is yet not actually seen to have been contaminated by the touch
of the dog, the crow or such other things. The mere presence of such
animals should not be made the ground for suspecting actual defilement,
until it is actually perceived. Similarly there can be no harm in a man
partaking of food prepared in the kitchen by cooks and others who may
have done the cooking without having themselves undergone a cleansing
process \[if anything unclean is not actually perceived\].

In this connection, no one should entertain the idea that—‘there would
be nothing wrong in the partaking of food if the defilement were
entirely unknown.’ As this would be contrary to what has been declared
(in 5.20) regarding the sinfulness of eating certain things
*unintentionally*.

Thus the conclusion is that a thing is to be regarded as *pure* in
connection with which no contamination is known by any of the recognised
means of knowledge. But when, even in the absence of definite proof,
there be even the slightest and most far-fetched suspicion regarding
contamination, the thing concerned should be washed with water. *E.g*.
when from among a large number of dishes and cups lying in the same
place, if even *one* has been seen to be contaminated by the touch of
the dog or some such thing, all the rest of them also should be washed
with water.

To this same category (of ‘*what is not seen*’) belongs also ‘*what is
commended by word*.’ That is cultured men should be made to pronounce
the thing to be *pure*. They say that things become pure by the
Brāhmaṇa’s word. The *present tense* in ‘*praśasyate*’, ‘*is
commended*’, has the force of the *Injunctive*.

Some people explain the^(‘)commendation’ here spoken of as follows “When
the person going to make use of a certain thing has seen it being
defiled, even if he does not himself see it being purified, he should
believe it to have been purified if cultured people assure him that it
has undergone purification.”

This however is not right. Since the assertion of a trustworthy person
has nowhere been spoken of as being unreliable, to assert it here would
be a needless repetition.

Others have explained the term ‘*what is washed with water*’ as meant to
be an example,—and the ‘*unseen*’ and the ‘*commended by word*’ as the
two whose purity is here enjoined; the sense being—‘Just as what is
washed with water is pure, so also should be regarded *what is not seen*
and *what is commended by word*’

“If everything is *pure*, in which no contamination is cognised by
either Perception or Inference or Verbal Authority,—then why should the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* have been prescribed (under 5.21) as to be performed for
the expiation of the sin of having partaken of defiled food, without
knowledge *?*”

What has been said under 5.21 is in connection with what is *At for
being eaten*; while the present text deals with *purification* in
general. Or, a distinction may be drawn between the two declarations,
either on the ground of one referring to cases of more serious
defilement than the other, or on the ground of one referring to times of
distress and the other to normal times.—(125)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 127 of others.)

This is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 469) as laying down the means of
satisfaction where defilement is only suspected;—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
454), which adds the following note:—‘*adṛṣṭam*’ is ‘that which has
never been known to be suspected of defilement’,—‘*vācā
praśasyate*’—when a thing has been suspected of being defiled, if the
Brāhmaṇas declare ‘may this be pure’, it has to be regarded as
pure;—such being the explanation, it adds, provided by *Dīpakalikā* and
Kullūka Bhaṭṭa;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 818);—in *Nityācāropradīpa*
(p. 102) which explains ‘*adṛṣṭam*’, as ‘not perceived to be defiled’,
*i.e*., where no defilement is known to exist by any means of
knowledge,—‘*nirṇiktam*’, washed, when suspected of being
defiled,—‘*Vācā etc*.’ if even after washing, there is some compunction,
this is removed when the thing is commended;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p
292);—and in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 459) which says that ‘*brāhmaṇa*’
stands for all the four castes.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (3.101.40).—(Same as Manu).

*Baudhāyana* (1.9.9).—‘The gods created for Brāhmaṇas three means of
purification—ignorance of defilement, sprinkling with water and
commending by word of mouth.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.24).—‘They quote the following words of Prajāpati—The
gods created for Brāhmaṇas, three means of purifying—Ignorance,
sprinkling and commending by word of mouth.’

*Viṣṇu* (2?.47).—‘The gods have declared, as peculiar to Brāhmaṇas,
three means of effecting purity—if the impurity has not been perceived,
if the object is sprinkled with water, if, in doubtful cases, they
commend it with speech.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.191).—(See under 124 then)—‘What is verbally cemmended
(commended?), or washed with water, or unknown (as defiled) is ever
pure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

127	The gods declared three things (to be) pure to Brahmanas, that (on which) no (taint is) visible, what has been washed with water, and what has been commended (as pure) by the word (of a Brahmana).
</details>
