+++
title = "130 नित्यम् आस्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The mouth of women is always pure; as also the bird in the dropping of fruits; the calf is pure in causing the flow (of milk); and the dog is pure in the catching of deer—(128).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सर्व**स्त्रीणाम्** **आस्यं शुचि** परिचुंबनादौ । "स्त्रियश् च रतिसंसर्गे" (वध् २८.८) इति स्मृत्यन्तरम् । रतिसंबन्धिनीष्व् एव न मातृभगिण्यादिषु । अत्र उच्छिष्टप्रतिषेधो ऽयं न मन्तव्यो योषितः । सत्य् अपि रतिसंबन्धित्वे "नाश्नीयाद् भार्यया सार्धम्" (म्ध् ४.४३) इति वचनान् न भुज्येतेति सिद्धं चतुर्थाध्याये । नित्यग्रहणान् न संयोगवेलायाम् एव, किं तर्हि तदर्थायाम् एव अप्रवृत्तौ[^२५९] ।


[^२५९]:
     M G: tadarthāyā mantrapravṛttau

- **शकुनिः फलपातने** । पक्षिमात्रवचने ऽपि शकुनिशब्दः काककङ्कादीनां विट्भुजा नेष्यते समाचारात् । पातनग्रहणाद् वृक्षस्थस्य फलस्यायं विधिः । 

- **प्रस्रवे** दुह्यमानाया गोर् **वत्सः** पयःप्रक्षरणार्थं स्तनेषु संश्लिष्यते । अथ वोच्यते "गावो मेध्या मुखाद् ऋते"[^२६०] इति वचनाद् अशुचित्वे प्राप्ते, तन्निवृत्त्यर्थं वचनम् अतस् तदीयास्यसंस्पर्शस्य । न तु **श्वा** शुचिः । **मृगं** तु यदाखेटकादौ गृह्णाति हन्तुं तदा **शुचिः** ॥ ५.१२८ ॥


[^२६०]:
     Cite under 5.131
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mouth of all women is ‘*pure*’— for the purposes of kissing &c.
‘Women during sexual intercourse etc.’—says another *Smṛti* -text. What
is said here applies only to such women with whom sexual intercourse is
possible, and not to the mother, sister and such women. This should not
be understood to be the denial of the impurity attaching to the mouth
until it is washed after food. Because even though the wife is a woman
with whom sexual intercourse is possible, yet it has been declared in
discourse IV that ‘one should not eat with his wife’.

The addition of the term ‘*always*’ implies that the mouth is pure, not
only at the time of the actual intercourse, but also during the acts
that lead up to it.

‘*The bird in the dropping of fruits*’.— Though the term “*śakuni*’,
‘*bird*’, denotes all kinds of birds, yet by usage, what is said here is
not applicable to the crow, the vulture or other such birds as feed upon
unclean things.

Since the text uses the term ‘*dropping*’, the present rule applies only
to fruits on the tree.

‘*In causing the flow*’.—*When* the cow is being milked, the calf is
made to touch the teats for the purpose of making the milk to flow; and
yet it has been declared that ‘cows are pure except in their mouths’; so
that the touch of the calf’s mouth might be regarded as a source of
impurity; it is with a view to preclude this notion that we have the
present text.

The dog itself is not pure; but it is to be regarded as pure when in the
course of hunting, it catches’the deer—(128).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 130 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 835);—in *Śuddhikaumudī*
(p. 355), which says the meaning is that the woman’s mouth is clean, for
the purpose of kissing;—and in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 84) which says
‘women’ means ‘one’s own wife’, and that ‘*prasrave*’ means ‘in drinking
the milk of the cow.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.9, 2).—‘A calf is pure in making the milk flow; a bird
in the dropping of fruits, women at the time of dalliance and a dog in
catching a deer.’

*Sumantu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Women, infants, mosquitoes, flies,
cats, rats, shadow, seats, beds, conveyances and water-particles are
always pure.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Of Brāhmaṇas, the feet are pure;
of goats and horses, the mouth; of cows, the hind-part is pure; of
women, the whole body.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (28.8).—‘A calf is pure for the flowing of milk; a bird when
it causes a fruit to fall, women during dalliance, and a dog when it
catches a deer.’

*Uśanas* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 144).—‘The cow is pure at the hind-part,
the goat and other at the front; women are pure all over; but their
heart is impure.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.45, 47).—‘Wild animals killed by dogs and fruits thrown by
birds, what has been spoilt by children and what has been handled by
women,...the Lord of Created Beings has declared these to be pure.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.49).—‘The mouth of the woman is always pure, a bird is pure
in the dropping of fruits; a sucking calf in the flowing of milk; and a
dog in the catching of deer.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.187, 192-195).—‘The woman’s mouth is pure...... So is
the deer’s flesh dropped by dogs, Caṇḍālas, carnivorous animals and
others...... Sun’s rays, fire, goat, shadow, cow, horse, earth, air,
liquid particles and flies are pure for touching; and the calf is pure
in making the milk flow. The goat and the horse are pure in their mouth,
but not so the cow, nor the excretions from human bodies. Roads are
purified by the rays of the sun and the moon and by wind; particles
issuing from the mouth are pure, so also water dropped during sipping
water and the hairs of the moustache in the mouth.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 274).—‘Seat, bed, conveyance, woman’s mouth,
blanket, and razor,—these and the sacrificial cups, the wise never
regard as defiled. The following are always pure to the touch:—cow,
horse, liquid particles, shadow, flies, locusts, parrots, goat,
elephant, martial umbrella, solar and lunar rays, earth, lire, dust,
air, water, curd, clarified butter, milk.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Smoke, fire and dust wafted by the wind, are pure.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The mouth of one’s wife during.dalliance and of
the infant just born are pure.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Goats and horses arc pure in their mouth, cows are pure
in their hind-part, trees are pure when in flower; Brāhmaṇas are always
pure.’

*Śivadharmottara* (Do.).—‘Brāhmaṇa, cow, flies, perspiration, shadow,
lire, sun’s rays, dust, earth, air,—are pure in touching...... The
shadow cast by the Caṇḍāla and the out cast is never defiling to the
touch.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Woman’s mouth during
dalliance.’

*Parāśara* (7.35).—‘Unimpeded currents are never impure, nor dust raised
by the wind; women, old persons and children are never impure.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

130	The mouth of a woman is always pure, likewise a bird when he causes a fruit to fall; a calf is pure on the flowing of the milk, and a dog when he catches a deer.
</details>
