+++
title = "136 एका लिङ्गे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One who desires cleanliness should apply earth—once to the urinary organ, thrice to the anus, ten times to one hand and seven times to both hands.—(134).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विण्मूत्रोत्सर्गानन्तरं मेढ्रस्य शुद्ध्यर्थम् **एका** **मृद्** दातव्या वामेन । स्मृत्यन्तरे शुद्धिविधानाद् यावती तस्मिन् हस्ते याति तावती सोदका ग्रहीतव्या । अहं तु ब्रवे, "अर्थवत्" (म्ध् ५.१३२) इति वचनेनोक्तम् एव परिमाणम् । <u>केचित्</u> पठन्ति ।

- प्रथमा प्रसृतिर् ज्ञेया द्वितीया तु तदर्धिका ।

- तृतीया मृत्तिका ज्ञेया त्रिभागकरपूरणे ॥

एतच् च परिमाणं पायाव् एव । अन्यत्र त्व् "अर्थवत्" इति । एकोत्सर्गे ऽपीयत्य् एव संख्या । आवृत्तिविधानं चेदम् । मृदां भेदो[^२६७] गवादिवत् । तथा चात्रोच्यते "वल्मीकाद् दूरतराद् अश्वस्थानाच् चान्येत्यादि" । एवम् इह सिता कृष्णा लोहितेत्याद्य् अपि नादरणीयम् । **अभीप्सता** इच्छतेति ॥ ५.१३४ ॥


[^२६७]:
     M G: bhede
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

After the passing of urine and faeces, for the cleansing of the urinary
organ, earth should be applied to it once.

In another *Smṛti* it has been laid down that one should take as much
earth mixed with water as can be contained in one hand. What I assert is
that in view of what has been said regarding the using of as much earth
and water as may be necessary, the proper quantity would be what is
stated in the present text. Some people quote, in this connection, the
following saying—‘The hand bring filled up, the first (and largest)
measure of it is called *Prasṛti*, the second is half of it; and the
third part of it is called *mṛttikā*.’ But this measure applies to the
case of anus-cleansing only. In all other cases, as much is to be used
as may be necessary.

In the case of a single evacuation also, the number of applications is
to be as here prescribed; and what is prescribed is the repetition of
the act (of rubbing and washing).

There is a distinction among the various kinds of ‘earth’, just as there
is among the various kinds of the ‘cow’ and other things. In present
connection, for instance, it has been declared that ‘earth should be got
from a place far removed from an ant-hill, us also from the stables’ and
so forth. No account need be taken however of the distinction into
‘white’, ‘black’, ‘red’ and so forth.

‘*Who desires*’—who wishes.—(134).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 136 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 36);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p.
255);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 215);—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 334),
which explains ‘*ekatra*’ as ‘in the left hand’;—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
330), which explains ‘*ubhayoḥ*’ as ‘over the two hands’;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 46), which explains ‘*ekatra*’ as ‘over the
left hand’; it notes the reading ‘*vāmakare*’; and explains ‘*ubhayoḥ*’
as ‘over the two hands’;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 46);—in *Smṛtikaumudī*
(p. 57) which explains ‘*ekatra*’ as ‘*vāme*,’ ‘over the left hand’;—in
*Yatidharmasaṅgraha* (p. 53);—in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 46), which
explains ‘*ekatra*’ as ‘over the left hand’ and, ‘*ubhayoḥ*’ as ‘over
both the hands’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 266), which says that
‘*śuddhi*’ here stands for *purity*, and not *cleanliness* or freedom
from smell &c., as this latter could be secured by even a lesser number
of applications.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (6.18).—‘The organ is cleansed by one application of earth,
the right hand by three, the feet by two, the arms by five, the left
hand by ten, and both hands and feet by seven.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.25).—‘The organ should be cleaned by earth once, the hind
parts three times, the left hand ten times, both hands together seven
times, and both feet together three times.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.10.11-14).—‘After urinating, he shall clean the organ
with earth and water,—the hand three times...... the number of
applications is thrice three for both hand and feet.’

*Śāṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 36).—‘To the arms, earth should be applied seven
times, to the urinary organ, twice, to one hand, twenty times, and to
both hands fourteen times.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—Applying earth ten times to the left hand, six times on
the back, seven times to both hands, and to the feet three times,—he
shall wash.’

*Śātātapa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 215).—‘Once to the urinary organ, three
times to the left hand, twice to both hands,—this is the purification
laid down on passing urine; it should be thrice this on passing faeces.’

*Baudhāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 215)—‘Earth shall be applied to the
anus five times, to the left hand and feet thrice each.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do., pp. 215-216).—‘Earth shall be applied five times to the
anus, ten times to one hand and seven times to both hands, seven to both
feet, and two to the urinary organ.’

*Ādityapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Twenty times to one hand and fourteen times to
both... Half of this serves to purify Śūdras and women. The purification
at night is to be half of what it is during the day; and a quarter of
this latter, on a journey; one in distress may do as much as he can.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

136	He who desires to be pure, must clean the organ by one (application of) earth, the anus by (applying earth) three (times), the (left) hand alone by (applying it) ten (times), and both (hands) by (applying it) seven (times).
</details>
