+++
title = "138 कृत्वा मूत्रम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having passed urine or faeces, and sipped water, one should touch. with water the cavities; also when he may be going to read the Veda, and always when going to take food.—(136).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मूत्रोत्सर्गदेशान् मूत्रादिसंबन्धान्[^२६८] **कृत्वा** शोधयित्वा यथोक्तेन विधिना । **आचान्तः** **खानि** इन्द्रियाणि **उपस्पृशेत्** । **वेदम् अध्येष्यमाणश् च** द्वितीये स्वाध्यायविधौ । प्राथमिकार्थत्वात् करोतेः कृत्वा उत्सृज्येति प्रतीयते । उन्मृज्य मूत्रं पुरीषं च पायूपस्थं क्षलयित्वा आचामेत् । **वेदम् अधेष्यमाणश् च** स्वाध्यायविधेर् धर्मतयोक्तम् "अध्येष्यमाणस् त्व् आचान्तः" (म्ध् २.७०) इति । इदं त्व् अध्यापयतो ऽध्येष्यतो[^२६९] वा[^२७०] । अन्यथा वेदम् उदाहरन्त उच्यन्ते । लौकिकानि क्रियान्तराणि कृत्वा नानाचान्तो वेदाक्षराण्य् उच्चारयेत् । **अन्नम् अश्नंश् च** ॥ ५.१३६ ॥


[^२७०]:
     G 2nd ed. add: mṛjyetyeva


[^२६९]:
     M G: 'nyato


[^२६८]:
     M G 1st ed.: -saṃbandhāt
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Having ‘*passed*’—*i.e*., cleansed away according to the aforesaid
directions,—all taint of urine &c., from the urinary organ, etc.;—‘*and
sipped water*,’—‘*one should touch with water the cavities*’.

‘*Also when he may be going to read the Veda*’—*i.e*., according to the
course of Vedic study preserved in Discourse II.

In accordance with its primary signification, the word ‘*kṛtvā*’,
‘*having passed* appears to mean ‘having evacuated’; and the meaning is
that—‘after having passed urine and faeces and washed the anus and the
urinary organ, one should sip water’.

‘*Also when going to read the Veda*;’—the sipping of water has been
prescribed as a necessary duty in connection with the course of Vedic
study, under 2.70. What is prescribed here is meant for all sorts of
reading of the Veda—either by one who is *teaching* it, or *reading* it.
In other cases, people are said to be ‘reciting’ the Veda
(*udaharantaḥ*). The meaning is that after having done other secular
acts, one should not pronounce the words of the Veda, without having
sipped water.

‘*Also when going to take food*.’ (136).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 138 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 223), the reading
wherein however is different, except in the first quarter;—in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 957), which has the following notes:—‘*kṛtvā*’, having
vacuated,—after evacuating the bladder and bowels one should wash the
anus and rinse the mouth, and touch the ‘holes’, *i.e*., the sense
organs,—‘*vedam etc*.,’ while engaged in other ordinary works one should
rinse his mouth before reciting the Veda, also when going to take
food,—in *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 15):—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*, (Āhnika, p.
8b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (1.35, 36, 44).—‘Turning his face to the east or to the north,
he shall purify himself from personal defilement—seated in a pure place,
placing his right arm between his knees, arranging his dress (and sacred
thread) in the manner required for a sacrifice to the gods, he shall,
after washing his hands up to the wrist, three or four times, silently
sip water reaching his heart; twice wipe his lips; sprinkle his head and
feet; touch the cavities in the head with the right hand; and place it
on the crown of his head (and on the navel) on passing urine or
faeces... water should be sipped.’

*Baudhāyana* (l.8.26).—‘After sipping water, he shall touch the cavities
of the head with water, also the feet, the navel, the head and the left
hand.’

*Āpastamba* (1.16.2-7).—‘Sitting, he shall sip water (for purification)
thrice, the water penetrating his heart; he shall wipe his lips three
times;—some declare that he shall do this twice; he shall then touch his
lips once;—twice, according to some; having sprinkled water on his left
hand with his right, he shall touch both his feet, and his head and
organs, eyes, nose and ears.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.27-29).—‘He shall twice wipe his mouth; he shall touch the
cavities with water; he shall pour water on his head and on the left
hand.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.75).—‘Having sneezed, slept or eaten, going to eat or to
study, having drunk water, having bathed or spat or put on his garments,
or walked on the high road, or discharged urine or faeces, or touched
dry bones of a five-toed animal, he should sip water.’

*Viṣṇu* (62.7-8).—‘Let him wipe his lips twice; let him touch the
cavities above the navel, his head and his chest with water.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

138	When he has voided urine or faeces, let him, after sipping water, sprinkle the cavities, likewise when he is going to recite the Veda, and always before he takes food.
</details>
