+++
title = "144 वान्तो विरिक्तः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having vomitted or purged, one should bath and then eat clarified butter. After having eaten his food, he should only sip water. For one who has copulated bathing has been ordained.—(142).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वमनविरेचने प्रसिद्धे । अशितम् अन्नं येन मुखेनोद्गीर्णं स **वान्तः** पुरुषः । यस्योच्चारवेगा अष्टसंख्याया ऊर्ध्वं जाताः, हरीतक्यादिभक्षणेन व्याधिना वा, स **विरिक्तः** । तौ स्नानं प्रथमं कुर्याताम् । ततो ऽन्ते **घृतप्राशनं** कृत्वैतद् अन्यद् अन्नम् अद्यताम् । न चानेन घृतप्राशनेन भोजनान्तरनिवृत्तिः । प्रायश्चित्तेषु द्रव्यशुद्धिर् इयं भस्मोदकमार्जनवद् **घृतप्राशनम्** । **आचमेद् एव भुक्त्वान्नम्** । अन्नं भुक्त्वा तद् अहर् एव यदि वमनविरेचने स्यातां तदाचमनम् एव केवलम्, न स्नानघृतप्राशने । 

- <u>अपरैस् तु</u> स्वतन्त्रं व्याख्यायते । भुक्त्वाचामेद् एव । भोजनानन्तरम् आचमनं विहितं तस्यैवायम् अपवादः । 

- **मैथुनिनः** । स्त्रियां कृतशुक्रोत्सर्गः स्नानेन शुध्यति ॥ ५.१४२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘Vomitting’ and ‘purging’ are well known. The man who throws out the
food that he has eaten is said to have ‘*vomitted*’. The man the number
of whose motions has gone beyond the number *eight*,— either through
disease, or through his having taken *Harītakī* or some such
purgative—is said to have ‘*purged*.’

These two persons should first of all bathe.

Then, they should eat clarified butter and then any other kind of food;
and the injunction of eating clarified batter is meant to be a
prohibition of other kinds of food. Just as in the case of expiatory
rites, ashes and water are regarded as means of purification, so in the
case in question, is the eating of clarified butter.

‘*After having taken food he should only sip water*’— After he has taken
his food, if he happen to vomit or purge on the same day, then he should
do the sipping of water only, and not. bathing and eating of clarified
butter.

Others have taken this independently by itself, to mean that ‘after
having taken his food he should sip water this being a reiteration of
the water-sipping that has already been prescribed as to be done after
meals.

‘*One who has copulated*,’—*i.e*., one who has had sexual intercourse
with a woman,—becomes pure by bathing. (142).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(Verse 144 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 922); and again on (p. 926),
where it explains the meaning to be that ‘if one vomits after having
eaten food, he must wash’;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.30), which adds, like
*Aparārka*, that the last clause refers to sexual intercourse during the
wife’s ‘courses’;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 106), which notes that
‘*viriktaḥ*’ means ‘one who has abnormal purgings,’—and that the meaning
is that ‘if one vomits after he has taken his food, he should only
*wash*, and *not bathe*’;—and again on p. 199 where the construction of
the second half is explained as ‘*bhuktvā annam vāntaḥ*,’ whence the
meaning is that on vomitting immediately after food, there should be
*washing only*,—the particle ‘*eva*’ serving to preclude the *bathing*
which is prescribed in the first half of the verse for one who has
‘vomitted’;—the ‘sexual intercourse,’ refers to that during the
courses;—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 331), which explains ‘*viriktaḥ*’ as
‘one who has had many motions,’ and adds that if one vomits immediately
after taking his food, he is simply to rinse his mouth, and for the man
who has had sexual intercourse during the wife’s ‘period,’ he is
cleansed by bathing;—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 334), which says that
‘*vāntaḥ*’ is understood after ‘*bhuktvā annam*,’ and adds the same
notes;—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 796).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba* (2.1.21-23).—‘During intercourse only they shall he
together; afterwards separate; then they shall both bathe.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.67).—‘Bathing is also ordained after sexual intercourse,
after bad dreams, also when blood has issued from the throat and after
having vomited or been purged,’

*Parāśara* (Aparārka, p. 922).—‘After bad dreams and sexual intercourse,
or vomiting, or purging, or shaving,... one should bathe.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘After sexual intercourse, there should be immediate
bathing.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘When there is indigestion, or purging or vomiting, or
sleeping at sunset, after bad dreams, or touching a wicked man, one
shall only bathe.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

144	He who has vomited or purged shall bathe, and afterwards eat clarified butter; but if (the attack comes on) after he has eaten, let him only sip water; bathing is prescribed for him who has had intercourse with a woman.
</details>
