+++
title = "07 योगयुक्तो विशुद्धात्मा"

+++
5.7 But a Karma Yogin remains engaged in the performance of pure actions
prescribed by the Sastras, which are of the nature of propitiation of
the Supreme Person. By this, he becomes purified in mind. He thus
subdues his self, i.e., subdues his mind easily, because his mind is
engaged in the virtuous actions he has been performing before. Therefore
his senses are subdued. His self is said to have become the self of all
beings. Because of his being devoted to contemplation on the true nature
of the self, he finds that his self is similar to the self of all beings
like gods etc. One who contemplates on the true nature of the self
understands that all selves are of the same form or nature. The
distinctions obtaining among gods, men etc., cannot pertain to the form
of the self, because those distinctions are founded on particular
modifications of Prakrti i.e., the bodies of beings. Sri Krsna will
teach: 'For the Brahman (an individual self), when untainted, is the
same everywhere' (5.19). The meaning of this is that when dissociated
from the Prakriti, i.e., the body, the self is of the same nature
everywhere, i.e., in the bodies of gods, men etc. It is of the same form
of knowledge. The meaning is that one, who has become enlightened in
this way, active though he be, is not tainted on account of erroneously
conceiving what is other than the self (the body) as the self. He is not
at all associated therewith. Therefore, he attains the self without any
delay. As Karma Yoga is superior to Jnana Yoga because it is more easily
pursued and is more rapidly efficacious in securing the fruits, listen
to its reirement:
