+++
title = "15 नादत्ते कस्यचित्पापम्"

+++
5.15 Because, It, the Atman is 'all-pervading', i.e., is not limited to
particular area or space included in the bodies of gods, men etc.; It is
not the relative or the enemy of any one. For this reason It does not
take away or remove the evil or suffering of anyone such as a son who is
related and therefore dear to one; nor does It take away, i.e., remove
the happiness of anyone whom It deems with aversion. All this is the
effect of Vasanas or subtle impressions of Prakrti. How does do these
contrary Vasanas originte in the case of one whose intrinsic nature is a
described above; In answer it is said that knowledge is enveloped by the
darkness of ignorance. The Atman's knowledge is enveloped, i.e.,
contracted by preceding Karmas which are opposed to knowledge, so that a
person may be alified to experience the fruits of his own Karma. It is
by this Karma, which contracts knowledge, and can join the Jiva with the
bodies of gods etc., that the misconception that the bodies are the
selves is produced. Conseently there will originate the Vasanas or the
unconscious subtle impressions born of such misapprehension of the self
and the inclination to undertake actions corresponding to them. Sri
Krsna now brings into proper seence what has been taught before in the
following verses: 'You will completely cross over the sea of all your
sins with the boat of knowledge' (4.36), and 'The fire of knowledge
reduces all Karmas to ashes in the same way' (4.37), and 'For there is
no purifier here eal to knowledge' (4.38).
