+++
title = "16 ज्ञानेन तु"

+++
5.16 While all these selves are thus deluded, in the case of enlightened
souls, their delusive ignorance - which envelops knowledge and which is
of the form of accumulated, beginningless and endless Karma - is
destroyed by knowledge. As already described this knowledge is produced
by the teachings of the scriptures about the real nature of the self,
which are enriched by daily practice. The purity of this knowledge is
unexcelled. And in the case of those selves who regain the knowledge
that is natural to Them, it is found that it is unlimited and
uncontracted and illumining everything like the sun. Plurality of the
selves in Their essence is expressly mentioned in the case of those
whose ignorance is overcome, in the expression 'for those' in the text.
What was stated at the commencement, 'There never was a time when I did
not exist' (2.12) is expressed here with greater clarity. Moreover, this
plurality is not due to limiting adjuncts imposed on a single universal
self. For, as stated here, there cannot be any trace of such adjuncts
for those whose ignorance is destroyed, and still They are described as
a plurality. Hence knowledge is taught as an attribute inseparable from
the essential nature of the self, because a difference between the self
and its knowledge is made out in the statement, 'Knowledge, in their
case illuminates like the sun'. By the illustration of the sun, the
relation of the knower to his knowledge is brought out to be similar to
the luminous object and its luminosity. Therefore, it is appropriate to
understand that knowledge contracts by Karma in the stage of Samsara and
expands in the stage of Moksa (release). \[In this system the Atman has
two forms of Jnana or Knowledge - Dharmi-Jnana (self-awareness) and
Dharma-bhuta-Jnana (awareness of objects other than itself). It is the
latter that is contracted by ignorance and expands by knowledge. See
Intrdocution.\]
