+++
title = "47 योगिनामपि सर्वेषाम्"

+++
6.47 'Yoginam', which is the genitive case, has to be taken in the sense
of the ablative. In the verses beginning with, 'He sees the self as
abiding in all beings' (6.29), Yogins at four degrees of attainment have
been mentioned. Since the Yogin who is now mentioned in this passage
cannot be included in the four types mentioned earlier, the genitive
case specifying one out of many will be inappropriate here. In 'api
sarvesam,' those who practise austerities etc., are referred to by the
word 'sarva' (all). According to the principle set forth, here also the
case ending has to be taken as ablative. The meaning therefore is that
the Yogin who is now referred to, is the most integrated compared with
those mentioned earlier and all other types. Compared to this Yogin, the
differences in point of superiority and inferiority among the other
Yogins such as the performers of austerities etc., are of no
significance like mustard-seeds compared to Mount Meru. Even though
there exists smallness and bigness in relation to one another among
mustard-seeds, still when compared to Meru, such distinctions among them
have no significance, as they are all small compared to Meru. I consider
him the most integrated who, with his innermost self, has his mind fixed
on Me, on account of My being the only object of his overflowing love
and also on account of his having a nature which cannot be supported by
anything other than Myself; who has 'faith,' i.e., who strives rapidly
to attain Me because of his being unable to bear a moment's separation
from Me on account of My being very dear to him; and who 'worships Me,'
i.e., serves Me with devotion and meditates on Me - Me whose sportive
delight brings about the origination, sustentation and dissolution of
the entire cosmos filled with multifarious and innumerable objects of
enjoyment, enjoyers, means and places of enjoyment; who is untouched by
any evil without exception; whose divine figure is the treasue-house of
innumerable multitudes of auspicious, unlimited and unsurpassed
attributes such as knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and
splendour; whose divine figure is the treasure-house of infinite,
unsurpassed attributes agreeable and highly worthy, such as radiance,
beauty, fragrance, tenderness, pervading sweetness and youthfulness
which are uniform, inconceivable and divine, wondrous, eternal and
flawless; whose essential nature and alities transcend all thought and
words; who is the great ocean of compassion, condescension, paternal
love and beauty; who is the impartial refuge of all beings without
exception and without considerations of any difference; who is the
reliever of the distress of supplicants; who is the great, unfathomable
ocean of affection for supplicants; who has become visible to the eyes
of all men without abandoning His essential nature; who has incarnated
in the house of Vasudeva; who has made the entire would illumined with
His limitless and excellent glory; and who has satisfied the entire
universe with the impeccable glory of beauty. The idea is that I, who by
Myself alone see all things directly as they are, look upon him, the
last mentioned type of Yogi here, as superior to all other types
mentioned earlier.
