+++
title = "+124"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ इमं नो अग्ने ' इति नवर्चं द्वादशं सूक्तम् । द्वितीयाद्याभिस्तिसृभिरग्निर्ऋषिर्भूत्वा स्वात्मानं देवतारूपिणमस्तौत्। अतस्तासां स एवर्षिदेवता च । शिष्टाभिरग्निवरुणसोमा अस्तुवन् । अतस्तासां षण्णां त ऋषयः । आद्याग्न्नेयी । नवमीन्द्रदेवत्या। शिष्टासु चतसृषु लिङ्गोक्तदेवता । सप्तमी जगती शिष्टास्त्रिष्टुभः । तथा चानुक्रान्तम्---’ इमं नो नवैन्द्र्युत्तमा निहवोऽग्निवरुणसोमानामाद्याग्नेयी तिस्रश्चाग्नेरात्मस्तवः शिष्टा यथानिपातं सप्तमी जगती' इति । गतो विनियोगः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

124 (950)  
Various Gods  
Agni (2–4), Agni, Varuṇa, and Soma (1, 5–9)  
9 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 7  
SWJ  
This dialogue hymn may be one of the most discussed poems in the R̥gveda, and the  number, variety, and contradictory nature of its interpretations are truly astound ing—far too many and too diverse to be summed up here. (For a brief characteriza tion of many of these treatments see W. E. Hale [1986: 86–92], and for a recent and  intriguing interpretation see Proferes [2007: 121–27].)  
The hymn begins with an address to Agni by Indra (vs. 1); Agni answers in verse  2 and, in many interpretations, continues to speak in verses 3 and 4—though I fol low the opinion that Varuṇa and Soma are the speakers of those two verses. Indra  returns as speaker in verses 5 and 6, addressed to Varuṇa and Soma respectively.  The last four verses (7–10) appear to be the words of the poet.  
In his speech Indra is attempting to coax the other gods addressed to join him  in his new sacrifice, leaving behind their old ways and their old kin group. The gods  need little persuasion. After Indra promises to make him the oblation-bearer in  verse 1, Agni agrees with alacrity to go “as a god, from the non-god” and “from my  own fellowship to an alien lineage” (vs. 2). In verse 3 Varuṇa (if he is the speaker;  otherwise Agni again) echoes this proposed journey, in the expression “I go from  the non-sacrificial to the sacrificial portion,” while in verse 4 Soma (again, if he is  the speaker) “chooses Indra” and “leaves the father,” ending the verse with the ring ing declaration: “the kingship has made a revolution.”  
Thus the subject of the hymn seems to be nothing less than a radical politi cal and religious reconfiguration, with shifting alliances leading to a fundamental  

realignment of the major divinities and to a new sacrificial order and a new rule.  What has intensified the scholarly debate about this hymn is the assumed identity  of the losing side. In verse 3 we find “Father Asura” (or “the lordly father”), pre sumably the same father that Soma leaves after choosing Indra in verse 4. In verse  5 Indra asserts that the Asuras (or “lords”) have lost their māyā or “magic powers,”  while the first divinity to leave, Agni, begins verse 2 with the emphatic ádevād deváḥ “from a non-god (I) a god...” It has thus been difficult not to consider this hymn  in the context of the vexing question about the Asura–Deva rivalry so prominent in  Vedic prose, mirrored in the Avestan Ahura–Daēuua split, but complicated by the  R̥gveda, which shows almost no signs of such a rivalry or even of a defined group of  Asuras distinct from the Devas. Despite these R̥gvedic lacunae it was still tempting  to see in this hymn a depiction of the overthrow of the Asuras by the Devas and  a number of scholars have done so, although there are important counterindica tions—not least the passage just cited where Agni asserts his identity as a god even  as he is leaving his own kin-group, supposedly the Asuras.  
I will not pursue this particular question further, for want of space (and a  disinclination to engage in a debate unlikely ever to be satisfactorily resolved).  I will, however, point out a striking feature of the hymn that seems not to have  been sufficiently noted. Whoever the two opposing parties in this revolution were,  the power shift from one to the other was remarkably peaceful, especially for  the R̥gveda, where most conflicts have violence as their defining characteristic.  This peacefulness is emphasized throughout the hymn. Agni refers to the non-god  he left as “being kindly disposed” (śivá), apologetically describing himself as  “unkind” (áśiva) in leaving (vs. 2c). Varuṇa seems to counter this in verse 3c by  proclaiming to Father Asura that Agni was indeed kind (śéva) (in my interpreta tion: this pāda has been variously interpreted). In verse 7 Varuṇa is said to have  released the waters “without an excess of power,” and the waters thus released  “make peace with each other.” In verse 8 Indra “dwells peacefully” amid his sub  
jects. The only violence in the hymn is prospective: the smashing of Vr̥tra fore seen by Indra in verse 6, once Soma has allied himself with Indra. The hymn is  all about negotiation and a sort of sacrificial horse-trading: see Indra’s offers of  important roles to Agni (1c), Varuṇa (5d), and Soma (6d). Indra even begs Varuṇa  to “love” him (5b). The principal figures “choose” their side and their ruler (Soma  in 4b and even the female rivers in 8b) and make their own moves, as emphasized  by the repeated verbs of motion (“come!” 1a; “going . . .I go, . . .I leave, . . .I go”  2; “I go” 3d; “I leave . . .they bestir themselves. . .(I) coming here” 4; “come!” 5d;  “come forth!” 6c). The peaceful and voluntary nature of the change in alliances—  
the lack of retaliation by the deserted side, the lack of interest in pursuing their  advantage and crushing their opponents by the winning side—distinguishes this  episode not only from almost every other such situation in the R̥gveda but also  from the perpetual conflict and reflexive hostility between Asuras and Devas in  middle Vedic literature—an indication, perhaps, that that rivalry is not the con  
text in which to interpret this hymn. Although, given the apparent failure of so many R̥gvedic interpreters to iden tify the deserted party successfully, it is foolhardy to suggest my own candidate,  I will make an unemphatic essay in that direction. Note first that the figure most  clearly left behind by the deserting gods is a “father”—qualified once as Father  Asura/lordly father (3c), once just as father (4b). Note also the first half of verse  6, where Indra points to the sun and its previous preeminence on the scale of  value, but suggests that it is now eclipsed or rivaled by the light of the broad  midspace. Let us also remember the heads of the pantheons in Greek and Roman  mythology, Zeus Patēr and Iuppiter respectively, and the curious fact that the  cognate figure in ancient India, formulaically transparent Dyaus Pitar “Father  
Sky/Heaven,” has no comparable prominence in Vedic mythology though he is  reasonably well attested in the texts. On putting these clues together, it seems  possible that the old sky-centered religion focused on the inherited paternal  divinity Dyaus quietly gave way to one located in realms closer to men, where  divinities concerned themselves with issues important to mankind, such as the  release of the waters (vss. 7–8), and actively sought the praise and sacrificial  offerings of men (vs. 9 and, by implication, throughout the hymn). Dyaus Pitar  remained a revered figure but played little role in the sacrificial system. There  was thus no violent rupture in the social or religious fabric, just a peaceful fad ing into well-but-perfunctorily-honored irrelevance for Dyaus, displaced by  ritual-centered gods like Agni and Soma and those deeply involved with men’s  affairs, ethically (Varuṇa) or martially (Indra).  
JPB  
In the introduction above, SWJ expresses well-considered doubt about the possibil ity of ever resolving the interpretive difficulties of this hymn. In trying once again to  understand the narrative and situation behind it, I know I risk adding yet another  not quite convincing interpretation to an already large stack of not quite convinc ing interpretations. But this hymn is difficult to avoid, because it is central to one of  the more intriguing questions of Vedic religious history: When and how does the  story of the conflict of Devas and Asuras develop? There is little possible evidence  and still less likely evidence in the R̥gveda for this narrative staple of the later Vedic  and classical traditions. We have pointed out several passages that might reflect it,  but even these are not certain (see, for example, X.53.4 and 157.4). However, as my  colleague pointed out above, a number of scholars have cited X.124 not only as  evidence for the definition of the Asuras as a group of deities distinct from and in  opposition to Devas but also as evidence—the only evidence—for an elaborate nar rative in which former Asuras shift to the side of the Devas (see, for example, Brown  1919: 100, Kuiper 1975, Oberlies 1998: 391).  
In Brereton (forthcoming b), I have proposed a different approach to the hymn.  I try to show that this hymn asserts a human claim of succession after the death of a  previous ruler. The hymn is indeed a dialogue, but I identify the speakers differently  

from their assignment below. Verse 1, I believe, is not in the voice of Indra, but in  that of the sacrificer, in whose rite the hymn was recited. The first three pādas are  a fairly standard invitation to Agni to come to the sacrifice. It is only in the last  pāda that the verse takes an unexpected turn: “For a long time,” it states, Agni has  “lain in long darkness.” That is to say, the ritual fire has been extinguished. The  later Veda prescribes that the ritual fire be extinguished at the death of a sacrificer,  and therefore at least one possibility is that this summons to Agni is a summons to  return after such a death. Verse 2 is Agni’s response: he has departed from one who  was a mortal, a “non-god,” but he now returns to his new life as the sacrificial fire  of a living sacrificer. In verse 3 the new sacrificer welcomes Agni, who previously  was the guest of the old sacrificer, to the “many domains of truth,” the places where  the new sacrificer has now installed the sacrificial fires. The sacrificer then proclaims  a kindness for his “lordly father,” the deceased sacrificer, thus identifying the old  sacrificer as both his own father and a “lord,” a ruler. The kindness he offers is the  continuation of his father’s ritual performance, which will guarantee his father’s life  in the realm of the ancestors, and in this way he converts Agni’s “unkindness” in  deserting his father to an act of kindness. In verse 4 Agni once again speaks. For  many years he acted “within it”—if antár asmin refers to the sacrifice obliquely  mentioned in verse 3—or “within him,” within the sphere or authority of the old  sacrificer. But now Agni chooses “Indra.” As in IV.42, the coronation hymn of King  Trasadasyu, “Indra” here is the new king. “The kingship has made a revolution,”  Agni declares, for there is a new king, and Agni promises to do what he can to help  in the institution of that king’s rule. To this the new sacrificer and king replies, now  addressing Varuṇa, who has been made present by Agni. He says that rival lords  lack the ability to rule, and therefore Varuṇa should come and govern with him and  in support of him.  
In my view the dialogue ends with verse 5. In verse 6 the sacrificer and new king  makes a final declaration, in which he explicitly identifies himself with Indra, here by  assuming Indra’s most characteristic deed, the destruction of Vr̥tra. The final three  verses are in the voice of the priestly narrator. In verse 7 he identifies the new king with  Varuṇa by attributing to him the deeds of Varuṇa, and in verse 8 the new king once  again becomes Indra. Finally in verse 9 the sage poets “discern” Indra. And where do  they discern him? In the king, who acts in accordance with the praise that follows him!  
Thus, the hymn parallels IV.42, in which Trasadasyu acts as both Varuṇa and  Indra in peace and in war. Unlike Trasadasyu, however, the claimant here seems to  have had opposition, which would have made the ritual affirmation of his rule all the  more essential. In this interpretation, ásura “lord” or “lordly” dissolves as a designa  
tion for a group of gods. In its two occurrences, in the singular in verse 3 and in the  plural in verse 5, ásura refers to human lords, not to gods or antigods or old gods.  And not only does it refer to humans, but also to quite different humans: in verse 3  to the predecessor of the sacrificer and in verse 5 to the sacrificer’s enemies or rivals.
</details>
