+++
title = "03 ये"

+++
12.3 Ye, those; tu, however; who, pari-upasate, meditate in every way;
aksaram, on the Immutable; anirdesyam, the Indefinable-being unmanifest,
It is beyond the range of words and hence cannot be defined; avyaktam,
the Unmanifest-It is not comprehensible thrugh any means of knowledge-.
Upasana, meditation, means approaching an object of meditation as
presented by the scriptures, and making it an object of one's own
thought and dwelling on it uniterruptedly for long by continuing the
same current of thought with regard to it-like a line of pouring oil.
This is what is called upasana. The Lord states the characteristics of
the Immutable \[Here Ast. adds 'upasyasya, which is the object of
meditation'.-Tr.\] : Sarvatragam, all-pervading, pervasive like space;
and acintyam, incomprehensible-becuase of Its being unmanifest. For,
whatever comes within the range of the organs can be thought of by the
mind also. Being opposed to that, the Immutable is inconceivable. It is
kutastham, changeless. Kuta means something apparently good, but evil
inside. The word kuta (deceptive) is well known in the world in such
phrases as, 'kuta-rupam, deceptive in appearance,' 'kuta-saksyam, false
evidence', etc. Thus, kuta is that which, as ignorance etc., is the seed
of many births, full of evil within, referred to by such words as maya,
the undifferentiated, etc., and well known from such texts as, 'One
should know Maya to be Nature, but the Lord of Maya to be the supreme
God' (Sv. 4.10), 'The divine Maya of Mine is difficult to cross over'
(7.14), etc. That which exists on that kuta as its controller (or
witness) is the kuta-stha. Or, kutastha may mean that which exists like
a heap \[That is, motionless.\]. Hence it is acalam, immovable. Since It
is immovable, therefore It is dhruvam, constant, i.e. eternal.
