+++
title = "12 श्रेयो हि"

+++
12.12 Jnanam, knowledge; \[Firm conviction about the Self arrived at
through Vedic texts and reasoning.\] is hi, surely; sreyah, superior;
-to what;-abhyasat, to practice \[Practice-repeated effort to ascertain
the true meaning of Vedic texts, in order to acire knowledge.\] which is
not preceded by discrimination. Dhyanam, meditation, undertaken along
with knowledge; visisyate, surpasses even jnanat, that knowledge.
Karma-phala-tyagah, renunciation of the results of works; excels even
dhyanat, meditation associated with knowledge. ('Excels' has to be
supplied.) Tyagat, from this renunciation of the results of actions, in
the way described before; \[By dedicating all actions to God with the
idea, 'May God be pleased.'\] santih, Peace, the cessation of
transmigratory existence together with its cause; follows anantaram,
immediately; not that it awaits another accasion. Should the
unenlightened person engaged in works be unable to practise the
disciplines enjoined earlier, then, for him has been enjoined
renunciation of the results of all works as a means to Liberation. But
this has not been done at the very beginning. And for this reason
renunciation of the results of all works has been praised in, 'Knowledge
is surely superior to practice,' etc. by teaching about the successive
excellence. For it has been taught as being fit to be adopted by one in
case he is unable to practise the disciplines already presented
\[Presented from verse 3 onwards.\] Objection: From what similarly does
the eulogy follow; Reply: In the verse, 'When all desires clinging to
one's heart fall off' (Ka, 2.3.14), it has been stated that Immortality
results from the rejection of all desires. That is well known. And 'all
desires' means the 'result of all rites and duties enjoined in the Vedas
and Smrtis'. From the renunciation of these, Peace surely comes
immediately to the enlightened man who is steadfast in Knowledge. There
is a similarity between renunciation of all desires and renunciation of
the results of actions by an unenlightened person. Hence, on account of
that similarity this eulogy of renunciation of the results of all
actions is meant for rousing interest. As for instance, by saying that
the sea was drunk up by the Brahmana Agastya, the Brahmanas of the
present day are also praised owing to the similarity of Brahminhood. In
this way it was been said that Karma-yoga becomes a means for
Liberation,since it involves renunciaton of the rewards of works. Here,
again, the Yoga consisting in the concentration of mind on God as the
Cosmic Person, as also the performance of actions etc. for God, have
been spoken of by assuming a difference between God and Self. In, 'If
you are unable to do even this' (11) since it has been hinted that it
(Karma-yoga) is an effect of ignorance, therefore the Lord is pointing
out that Karma-yoga is not suitable for the meditator on the Immutable,
who is aware of idenity (of the Self with God). The Lord is similarly
pointing out the impossibility of a karma-yogin's meditation on the
Immutable. In (the verse), 'they৷৷.attain Me alone' (4), having declared
that those who meditate on the Immutable are independent so far as the
attainment of Liberation is concerned, the Lord has shown in, '৷৷.I
become the Deliverer' (7), that others have no independence; they are
dependent on God. For, if they (the former) be considered to have become
identified with God, they would be the same as the Immutable on account
of (their) having realized non-difference. Conseently, speaking of them
as objects of the act of deliverance will become inappropriate! And,
since the Lord in surely the greatest well-wisher of Arjuna, He imparts
instructions only about Karma-yoga, which involves perception of duality
and is not associated with full Illumination. Also, no one who has
realized his Self as God through valid means of knowledge would like
subordination to another, since it involves a contradiction. Therefore,
with the idea, 'I shall speak of the group of virtues (as stated in),
"He hwo is not hateful towards any creature," etc. which are the direct
means to Immortality, to those monks who meditate on the Immutable,who
are steadfast in full enlightenment and have given up all desires,' the
Lord proceeds:
