+++
title = "20 ये तु"

+++
12.20 Tu, but; ye bhaktah, those devotees of Mine, the monks who have
resorted to the highest devotion consisting in the knowledge of the
supreme Reality; mat-paramah, who accept Me as the supreme Goal, to whom
I, as mentioned above, who am identical with the Immutable, am the
highest (parama), unsurpassable Goal; and sraddadhanah, with faith;
paryupasate, seek for, practise; idam, this; dharmyamrtam, ambrosia that
is indistinguishable from the virtues-that which is indistinguishable
from dharma (virtue) is dharmya, and this is called amrta (ambrosia)
since it leads to Immortality-; yatha-uktam, as stated above in, 'He who
is not hateful towards any creature,' etc.; te, they; are ativa, very;
priyah, dear; me, to Me. After having explained what was hinted in, 'For
I am very much dear to the man of Knowledge৷৷.'(7.17), that has been
concluded here in, 'Those devotees are very dear to Me.' Since by
seeking for this ambrosia which is indistinguishable from the virtues as
stated above one becomes very dear to Me, who am theLord Vishnu, the
supreme God, therefore this nectar which is indistinguishable from the
virtues has to be diligently sought for by one who is a seeker of
Liberation, who wants to attain the coveted Abode of Visnu. This is the
purport of the sentence. \[Thus, after the consummation of meditation on
the alified Brahman, one who aspires after the unalified Brahman, who
has the alifications mentioned in, 'He who is not hateful towards any
creature,' etc., who is pre-eminently fit for this purpose, and who
practises sravana etc. has the possibility of realizing the Truth from
which his Liberation logically follows. Hence, the conclusion is that
the meaning of the word tat (in the sentence tattvamasi) has to be
sought for, since his has the power to arouse the comprehension of the
meaning of that sentence, which is the means to Liberation.\]
