+++
title = "03 क्षेत्रज्ञञ् चापि"

+++
13.3 Ca api, and; viddhi, understand; mam, Me, the supreme God who is
transcendental; to be the ksetrajnam, 'Knower of the field' with the
characterisitics noted above; sarva-ksetresu, in all the fields. The
idea is this: Know the 'Knower of the field'- who has become diversified
by limiting adjuncts in the form of numerous 'fields' ranging from
Brahma to a clump of grass-as free from differentiations resulting from
all the limiting adjuncts, and as beyond the range of such words and
ideas as existece, nonexistence, etc. O scion of the Bharata dynasty,
since there remains nothing to be known apart from the true nature of
the field, the knower of the field and God, therefore; tat, that; is
jnanam, Knowledge, right knowledge; yat, which; is the jnanam,
knowledge; ksetra-ksetrajnayoh, of the field and the knower of the
field-which are the two knowables-, and by which Knowledge the field and
the knower of the field are made objects of knowledge. This is mama, My,
God Vishu's; matam, opinion. Objection: Well, if it be that in all the
field there exists God alone, and none else other than Him, as the
enjoyer, then God will become a mundane being; or, due to the absence of
any mundane creature other than God, there will arise the contingency of
the negation of mundance existence. And both these are undesirable,
since the scriptures dealing with bondage, Liberation and their causes
will become useless, and also becuase they contradict such valid means
of knowledge as direct perception. In the first place, mundane existence
which is characterized by happiness, sorrow and their cause is
apprehended through direct perception. Besides, from the perception of
variety in the world it can be inferred that mundane existence results
from virtue and vice. All this becomes illogical if God and the
individual soul be one. Reply: No, because this becomes justifiable
owing to the difference between Knowledge and ignorance. 'These two, viz
that which is know as Knowledge and that which is known as ignorance are
widely contradictory, and they follow divergent courses' (Ka. 1.2.4.);
and similarly, the different results, viz Liberation and enjoyment,
belonging (respectively) to those Knowledge and ignorance, have also
been pointed out to be contrary by saying that Liberation is the goal of
Knowledge, and enjoyment is the result of ignorance (see Ka. 1.2.2).
Vyasa, also has said so: 'Now, there are these two paths' (Mbh Sa.
241.6) etc. and, 'There are only these two paths,' etc. Here (in the
Gita) also, two kinds of steadfastness have been stated. And it is
understood from the Vedas, the Smrtis and reason that ignorance together
with its effects has to be destroyed by Knowledge. As for the Vedic
texts, they are: 'If one has realized here, then there is truth; if he
has not realized here, then there is great destruction' (Ke. 2.5);
'Knowing Him in this way, one becomes Immortal here' (Nr. Pu. 6); 'There
is no other path to go by' (Sv. 3.8); 'The enlightened man is not afraid
of anything' (Tai. 2.9.1). On the other hand, (the texts) with regard to
the unenlightened person are: 'Then, he is smitten with fear' (Tai.
2.7.1); 'Living in the midst of ognorance' (Ka. 1.2.5); One who knows
Brahman becomes Brahman indeed. In his line is not born anyone who does
not know Brahman' (Mu. 3.2.9); '(While he who worships another god
thinking,) "He is one, and I am another," does not know. He is like an
animal to the gods' (Br. 1.4.10). He who is a knower of the Self, 'He
becomes all this (Universe)' (Br. 1.4.10); 'When men will fold up space
like (folding) leather, (then) there will be cessation of sorrow,
without knowing the Deity' (Sv. 6.9). There are thousands of texts like
these. And the Smrti texts (from the Gita) are: 'Knowledge remains
covered by ignorance. Thery the creatures become deluded' (5.15); 'Here
itself is rirth conered by them whose minds are established on sameness'
(5.19); 'Since by seeing eally the God who is present alike everywhere
(he does not injure the Self by the Self, therefore he attains the
supreme Goal)' (13.28), etc. And as for reason, there is the text, 'Men
avoid snakes, tips of kusa-grass as also well when they are aware of
them. Some fall into them owing to ignorance. Thus, see the special
result arising from knowledge' (Mbh. Sa. 201.17). Similarly, it is known
that an unelightened person, who identifies himself with the body etc.
and who practises righteousness and unrighteousness under the impulsion
of attachment and aversion, takes birth and dies. It cannot be
reasonably denied by anyone that, those who see the Self as different
from the body etc. become liberated as a result of the cessation of
righteous and unrighteous conduct, which depends on the destruction of
attachment and aversion. The being so, the Knower of the field, who is
reality is God Himself, appears to have become a mundane soul owing to
the various adjuncts which are products of ignorance; as for instance
the individual soul becomes identified with the body etc. For it is a
well-known fact in the case of all creatures that their self-identify
with the body etc. which are not-Self is definitely caused by ignorance.
Just as, when a stump, of a tree is firmly regarded as a man, the
alities of a man do not thery come to exist in the stump, nor do the
alities of the stump come to the person, similarly the property
ofconsciousness does not come to the body, nor those of the body to
consciousness. It is not proper that the Self should be identified with
happiness, sorrow, delusion, etc., since they, like decrepitude and
death, are eally the products of ignorance. Objection: May it not be
said that this is not so, becuase of dissimilarity; The stump and the
man, which are verily objects of perception, are superimposed on each
other through ignorance by their perceiver. On the other hand, in the
case of the body and the Self,, the mutual superimposition occurs verily
between a knower and an object of perception. Thus, the illustration is
not eally applicable. Therefore, may it not be that the properties of
the body, though objects of knowledge, belong to the Self which is the
knower; Reply: No, since there arises the contingency of (the Self)
becoming devoid of consciousness! If alities such as happiness, sorrow,
delusion, desire, etc. of the body etc., which are the field and are
objects of knowledge, indeed belong to the knower, then it will be
necessary to explain the particular reason why some of the alities of
the object of knowledge-the field-superimposed through ignorance belong
to the Self, while decrepitude, death, etc. do not. (On the contrary) it
is possible to infer that they (happiness etc.) do not pertain to the
Self, since, like decrepitude etc., they are superimposed on the Self
through ignorance, and because they are either avoidable or acceptable.
This being so, the mundane state, consisting of agentship and
enjoyership pertaining to the objects of knowledge, is superimposed on
the knower through ignorance. Hence, nothing of the knower is affected
thery-in the same way as nothing of the sky is affected by the
superimposition of surface, diret, etc. (on it) by fools. Such being the
case, not the least touch of the mundane state is to be apprehended with
regard to the almighty \[see footnote on p.5, and p.168.\] God, the
Knower of the field, even though He exists in all the fields. For it is
nowhere seen in the world that anybody is benefitted or harmed by a
ality attributed to him through ignorance. As for the statement that the
illustration is not eally applicable-that is wrong. Objection: How;
Reply: Because what is intended as common between the illustration and
the thing illustrated is merely the superimposition through ignorance.
There is no disagreement as to that. However, as for your contention
that the illustration fails with regard to the Knower, that too has been
shown to be inapt by citing the example of decrepitude etc. \[If it be
held that objects of experience may be superimposed on one another, but
they cannot be superimposed on the experiencer, the answer is that this
cannot be a universal proposition. For decrepitude and death, which are
matters of experience, are superimposed on the Self, the experiencer.\]
Objection: May it not be that the Knower of the field becomes a mundane
being owing to his having ignorance; Reply: No, because ignorance is of
the nature of tamas. Since ignorance has the nature of covering, it is
indeed a notion born of tamas; it makes one perceive contrarily, or it
arouses doubt, or it leads to non-perception. For it disappears with the
dawn of discrimination. And the three kind of ignorance, viz
non-perception etc. \[Etc: false perception and doubt.\], are
experienced when there are such defects as blindness etc. which are
forms of tamas and have the nature of veiling. \[It is known through the
process of agreement and difference that false perception etc. arise
from some defects,and they are not the alities of the Self.\] Objection:
Here it is asserted that if this be the case, then ignorance is a ality
of the knower; Reply: No, for the defects such as blindness are seen to
belong to the eye which is an organ. As for your notion that 'ignorance
is a ality of the experiencer, and the very fact of being possessed of
the ality of ignorance is what constitutes the mundane state of the
Knower of the field; the assertion which was made (by the Vedantin) in
that connection, "that the Knower of th field is God Himself and not a
mundane being, " is improper,'-this is not so. As for example: Since
such defects as false perception etc. are seen to belong to the organ
eye, therefore false perception etc. or their causes, viz defects like
blindness etc., do not belong to the perceiver. Just as blindness of the
eyes does not pertain to the perceiver since on being curved through
treatment it is not seen in the perceiver, similarly notions like
non-perception, false perception, doubt, and their causes should, in all
cases, pertain to some organ; not to the perceiver, the Knower of the
field. And since they are objects of perception, they are not alities of
the Knower in the same way that light is of a lamp. Just because they
are objects of perception, they are cognized as different from one's own
Self. Besides, it is denied by all schools of thought that in
Liberation, when all the organs depart, there is any association with
such defects as ignorance etc. If they (the defects) be the alities of
the Self Itself, the Knower of the field, as heat is of fire, then there
can never be a dissociation from them. Again, since there can be no
association with or dissociation from anything for the immutable,
formless Self which is all-pervading like space, therefore it is
established that the Knower of the field is ever identical with God.
This follows alos from the utternance of the Lord, 'Being without
beginning and without alities' (31), etc. Objection: Well, if this be
so, then, owing to the nonexistence of the world and the mundane
creatures, there will arise the defect of the uselessness of the
scriptures, etc. Reply: No, since this (defect) is admitted by all. A
defect that is admitted by all who believe in the Self is not to be
explained by one alone! Objection: How has this been admitted by all;
Reply: People of all schools of thought who believe in the Self admit
that there is no worldly behaviour or the behaviour of a worldling in
the liberated ones. Yet, in their case (i.e. in those various schools),
it is not admitted that there is any possibility of such a defect as the
scriptures becoming useless, etc. Similarly, in our case let the
scriptures be useless when the knowers of the field become identified
with God; and purposeful within the sphere of ignorance. This is just as
in the case of all the dualists, where it is admitted that the
scriptures etc. become useful in the state of bondage, not in the state
of Liberation. Objection: Well, for us all dualists, bondage and
Liberation of the Self are real in the truest sense. So, when things to
be renounced or accepted as also the means thereto are real, the
scriptures etc. become meaningful. On the other hand, may it not be that
for the non-dualists, since duality deos not exist in truest sense, it
being the creation of ignorance, therefore the state of bondage of the
Self is not ultimately real, and hence the scriptures etc. become
purposeless as they remain shorn of a subject-matter; Reply: No, since
it is not logical that the Self should have different states. If this
were possible at all, then the states of bondage and freedom of the Self
should be simultaneous, or successive. As to that, they cannot occur
simultaneously, since they are contradictory-like rest and motion in the
same object. Should they occur successively and without being caused,
then there will arise the contingency of there being no Liberation; if
they occur through some cause, then, since they do not exist inherently,
there arises the contingency of their being ultimately unreal. In this
case also the assumption becomes falsified. Moreover, when ascertaining
the precedence and succession of the states of bondage and Liberation,
the state of bondage will have to be considered as being the earlier and
having no beginning, but an end. And that is contrary to valid means of
knowledge. Similarly it will have to be admitted that the state of
Liberation has a beginning, but no end- which is certainly opposed to
valid means of knowledge. And it is not possible to established
eternality for something that has states nd undergoes a change from one
state to another. On the other hand, if for avoiding the defect of
non-eternality the different states of bondage and Liberation be not
assumed, then, even for the dualists such defects as the purposelessness
of the scriptures become certainly unavoidable. Thus, the situation
being similar (for both), it is not for the Advaitin (alone) to refute
the objection. Nor do the scriptures become purposeless, because the
scriptures are applicable to the commonly known unenlightened person. It
is indeed in the case of the ignorant person-not in the case of the
enlightened one-that there occurs the perception of identity of the Self
with the effect (i.e. enjoyership) and the cause (i.e. agentship) which
are not-Self. For, in the case of the enlightened persons, it is
impossible that, after the dawn of the realization of non-identity of
the Self with effect and cause, they can have Self identification with
these as 'I'. Surely, not even a downright fool, or a lunatic and such
others, see water and fire or shade and light as identical; what to
speak of a discriminating person! Therefore, such being the case, the
scriptures dealing with injunction and prohibition do not concern a
person who sees the distinction of the Self from effect and cause. For,
when Devadatta is ordered to do som work with the words, 'You do this,'
Visnumitra who happens to be there does not, even on hearing the ;nd,
conclude, 'I have been ordered.' But this conclusion is reasonable when
the person for whom the order is meant is not understood. So also with
regard to cause and effect. Objection: Can it not be that, even after
having realized the Self as different from effect and cuase, it is ite
reasonable from the standpoint of natural relationship, \[Natural
relationship-Self-identification with the body through ignorance.\] that
with regard to the scriptures one should have the understanding, 'I am
enjoined to adotp the means that yields a desired result, and am
porhibited from adopting the means that leads to an undesirable result';
As for instance, in the case of a father and son, or between others,
even though there exists the awareness of the distinction between each
other, still there is the comprehension of the implication of the
injunctions and prohibitions meant for one as being also meant for the
other. \[In the (Br. (1.5.17) we read, 'Now therefore the entrusting:
When a man thinks he will die, he says to his son, "You are Brahman, you
are the sacrifice, and you are the world,"' etc. It has been enjoined
here in this manner that the son should accept as his own all the duties
thus entrusted to him by the father. Similarly, it is understood that
when a son in unable to perform his own duties, the father has to accept
them. So also in the case of brothers and others. Thus, in the case of
the enlightened person also, though there is a comprehension of his own
distinction from effect and cause, still, owing to his earlier
relationship with ignorance, body, etc., there is no contradiction in
his understanding that the injunctions and prohibitions are meant for
him.\] Reply: No, since identification of the Self with effect and cause
is possible only before attaining the knowledge of the Self as distinct
(from them). It is only after one has followed (or eschewed) what is
enjoined or prohibited by the scriptures that he comprehends his own
distinction from the effect and cause; not before. \[In B.S. (3.4.26-7)
it is said that the merit earned by the performance of scriptural duties
helps to generate knowledge of Brahman. Therefore these duties are not
meant for the enlightened. (By following what is enjoined, and avoiding
what is prohibited, one's mind becomes purified, and then only one
understands he is different from cause and effect-agentship and
enjoyership.-Tr.)\] Therefore it is established that the scriptures
dealing with injunctions and prohibitions are meant for the ignorant.
Objection: Well, if (injunctions and prohibitions) such as, 'One who
desires heaven shall perform sacrifices', 'One should not eat poisoned
meat,' etc. be not observed by those who have realized the Self as
distinct and by those who view only the body as the Self, then, from the
absence of any observer of those (injunctions etc.) there would follow
the uselessness of the scriptures. Reply: No, because engagement in or
abstention from actions follows from what is ordained by the scriptures.
As for one who has realized the identity of the Lord and the knower of
the field, one who has realized Brahman-he does not engage in action.
Similarly, even the person who does not believe in the Self does not
engage in action, under the idea that the other world does not exist.
However, one who has inferred the existence of the Self on the ground of
the wellknown fact that study of the scriptures dealing with injunctions
and prohibitions becomes otherwise purposeless, who has no knowledge of
the essential nature of the Self, and in whom has arisen hankering for
the results of actions-he faithfully engages in action. This is a matter
of direct perception to all to us. Hence, the scriptures are not
purposeless. Objection: May it not be that the scriptures will become
meaningless when, by noticing abstention from action in the case of men
with discrimination, their followers too will abstain; Reply: No,
because discrimination arises in some rare person only. For, as at
present, some rare one among many people comes to possess
discrimination. Besides, fools do not follow one who has discrimination,
because (their) engagement in action is impelled by defects such as
attachment etc. And they are seen to get engaged in such acts as black
magic. Moreover, engagement in action is natural. Verily has it been
said (by the Lord), 'But it is Nature that acts' (5.14). Therefore, the
mundane state consists of nothing but ignorance, and is an object of
perception (to the ignorant man who sees it) just as it appears to him.
Ignorance and its effects do not belong to the Knower of the feild, the
Absolute. Moreover, false knowledge cannot taint the supreme Reality.
For, water in a mirage cannot taint the supreme Reality. For, water in a
mirage cannot make a desert muddy with its moisture. Similarly,
ignorance cannot act in any way on the Knower of the field. Hence has
this been said, 'And understand Me to be knower of the field,' as also,
'Knowledge remains covered by ignorance' (5.15). Objection: Then, what
is this that even the learned say like the worldly people, 'Thus
\[Possessed of aristorcracy etc.\] am I,' 'This \[Body, wife, etc.\]
verily belongs to Me'; Reply: Listen. This is that learnedness which
consists in seeing the field as the Self! On the contrary, should they
realize the unchanging Knower of the field, then they will not crave for
enjoyment or action with the idea, 'May this be mine.' Enjoyment and
action are mere perversions. This being so, the ignorant man engages in
action owing to his desire for results. On the other hand, in the case
of an enlightened person who has realized the changeless Self,
engagement in aciton in impossible because of the absence of desire for
results. Hence, when the activities of the aggregate of body and organs
cease, his withdrawal from action is spoken of in a figurative sense.
Some may have this other kind of learnedness: 'The Knower of the field
is God Himself; and the field is something different and an object of
knowledge to the Knower of the field. But I am a mundane being, happy
and sorrowful. And it is my duty to bring about the cessation of worldly
existence through the knowledge of the field and the Knower of the
field, and by continuing to dwell in His true nature after directly
perceiving through meditation God, the Knower of the field,' and he who,
understands thus, and he who teaches that 'he (the taught) is not the
Knower of the field,' and he who, being under such an idea, thinks, 'I
shall render meaningful the scriptures dealing with the worldly state
and Liberation'-is the meanest among the learned. That Self-immolator,
being devoid of any link with the traditional interpreters of the
purport of the scriptures, misinterprets what is enjoined in the
scriptures and imagines what is not spoken there, and thery himself
becoming deluded, befools others too. Hence, one who is not a knower of
the traditional interpretation is to be ignored like a fool, though he
may be versed in all the scriptures. As for the objection that, if God
be one with the knower of the field, He will then become a mundane
being, and that, if the knowers of the fields are one with God, then
from the nonexistence of mundane beings will follow the absence of the
mundane state, -these two objections have been refuted by admitting
Knowledge and ignorance as having different characteristics. Objection:
How; Reply: By saying that any defect imagined through ignorance does
not affect the supreme Reality which is the substratum of that
(imagination). In accordance with this an illustration was cited that a
desert is not made muddy by water in a mirage. Even the defect of the
possibility of nonexistence of the mundange state, conseent on the
nonexistence of individual souls, stands refuted by the explanation that
the mundane state and the individual souls are imagined through
ignorance. Objection: The defect of mundane existence in the knower of
the field consists in his being possessed of ignorance. And
sorrowfulness etc. which are its products are matters of direct
experience. Reply: No, since whatever is known is an attribute of the
field, therefore the knower-the knower of the field-cannot reasonably be
tainted by the defects arising from it. Whatsoever blemish-not existing
in the knower of the field-you attribute to It is logically an object of
experience, and hence it is verily a ality of the field; not the ality
of the knower of the field. Nor does the knower of the field become
tainted thery, because of knower cannot possibly have any conjunction
with an object of knowledge. Should there be a conjunction, then there
will be no possibility at all of its (the latter's) becoming a knowable.
Oh! Sir, if being ignorant, sorrowful, etc. be alities of the Self, how
is it that they are directly perceived; Or how can they be alities of
the Knower of the field; If the conclusion be that all that is known
consititutes the field, and that the one who knows is verily the knower
of the field, then, to say that being ignorant, sorrowful, etc.are the
alities of the knower of the field and that they are directly perceived
is a contradictory statement having only ignorance as its basis. Here,
(the opponent) asks: To whom does ignorance belong; (The answer is that)
it belongs verily to him by whom it is experienced! Objection: In whom
is it perceived; Reply: Here the answer is: It is pointless to ask, 'In
whom is ignorance experienced;' Objection: How; Reply: If ignorance be
perceived (by you), then you perceive its possessor as well. Moreover,
when that possessor of ignorance is perceived it is not reasonable to
ask, 'In whom is it perceived;' For, when an owner of cattle is seen,
the estion, 'To whom do the cattle belong', does not become meaningful.
Objection: Well, is not the illustration dissimilar; Since, the cattle
and their owner are directly perceived, their relation also is directly
perceived. Hence the estion is meaningless. Ignorance and its possessor
are not directly perceived in that manner, in which case the estion
would have been meaningless. Reply: What will it matter to you if you
know the relation of ignorance with a person who is not directly
perceived as possessed of ignorance; Opponent: Since ignorance is a
source of evil, therefore it should be got rid of. Reply: He to whom
ignorance belongs will get rid of it! Opponent: Indeed, ignorance
belongs to myself. Reply: In that case, you know ignorance as also
yourself who possess it; Opponent: I know, but not through direct
perception. Reply: If you know through inference, then how is the
connection (between yourself and ignorance) known; Surely it is not
possible for you the knower to have at that time \['When you are knowing
your own ignorance.'\] the knowledge of the relation (of the Self) with
ignorance which is an object of knowledge; \['After having perceived
ignorance as an object of your knowledge, how can you who continue to be
the knower cognize yourself as the knower of that ignorance; For this
would lead to the contradiction of the same person becoming the subject
and the object of cognition.'\] because the cognizer is then engaged in
cognizing ignorance as an object. Besides, there cannot be someone who
is a (separate) cognizer of the relation between the knower and
ignorance, and a separate cognition of that (relation), for this would
lead to infinite regress. If the knower and the relation between the
knower and the thing known be cognizable, then a separate cognizer has
to be imagined. Of him, again, another knower has to be imagined; of him
again a separate cognizer would have to be imagined! Thus, an infinite
regress be comes unavoidable. Again, whether the knowable be ignorance
or anything else, a knowable is verily a knowable; similarly, even a
knower is surely a knower; he does not become a knowable. And when this
is so, \[Since the knower cannot be known, therefore his relation with
ignorance also cannot be known by himself or by anybody else\] nothing
of the cognizer-the knower of the field-is tainted by such defects as
ignorance, sorrowfulness, etc. Objection: May it not be said that the
(Self's) defect is surely this, that the field, which is full of
defects, is cognized (by It); Reply: No, because it is the Immutable,
which is consciousness, by nature, that is figuratively spoken of as the
cognizer. It is just like figuratively attributing the act of heating to
fire merely because of its (natural) heat. Just as it has been shown
here by the Lord Himself that identification with action, cause and
effect are absent in the Self, and that action, cause, etc. are
figuratively attributed to the Self owing to their having been
superimposed (on It) through ignorance, so has it been shown by Him in
various places: 'He who thinks of this One as the killer৷৷.' (2.19),
'While actions are being done in ever way by the gunas of Nature'
(3.27), 'The Omnipresent neither accepts anybody's sin৷৷.' (5.15), etc.
It has been explained by us, too, in that very way, and in the following
contexts also we shall explain accordingly. Objection: Well, in that
case, if identification with action, cause and effect be naturally
absent in the Self, and it they be superimpositions through ignorance,
then it amounts to this that actions are meant for being undertaken only
by the ignorant, not by the enlightened. Reply: It is true that is comes
to this. This very fact we shall explain under the verse, 'Since it is
not possible for one who holds on to a body৷৷.' (18.11). And, in the
context dealing with the conclusion of the purport of the whole
Scripture, we shall explain this elaborately under the verse, '৷৷.in
brief indeed, O son of Kunti,৷৷.which is the supreme consummation of
Knowledge' (ibid. 50) It is needless here to expatiate further, Hence we
conclude. The next verse, '(Hear about)৷৷.what that field is,' etc.,
summarizing the purport of the chapter dealing with the 'field' taught
in the verses begining from 'This body৷৷.'etc., is being presented. For
it is proper to introduce briefly the subject-matter that is sought to
be explained.
