+++
title = "06 महाभूतान्यहङ्कारो"

+++
13.6 Mahabhutani, the great elements: Those elements which are great
owing to their pervasion of all midifications, and which are subtle. As
for the gross elements, they will be spoken of by the word
indriya-gocarah, objects of the senses. Ahankarah, egoism, which is the
source of the great elements and consists of the idea of 'I'. Buddhih,
intellect, the source of egoism and consisting of the faculty of
judgement; ca, and; its cause, the avyaktam eva, Unmanifest itself, the
Undifferentiated, the power of God spoken of in, 'Maya of
Mine৷৷.difficult to cross' (7.14). The word eva (itself) is used for
singling out Prakrti (Nature). The Prakrti divided eightfold \[The
undifferentiated (avyakta), mahat, egoism and the five uncompunded
subtle elements\] is this much alone. The word ca (and) is used for
joining the various categories. The dasa, ten; indriyani, organs : The
five, organs ear etc., which are called sense-organs since they produce
perception, and the (other) five organs-organ of speech, hands,
etc.-which are called motor-organs since they accomplish actions. They
are ten. Ekam ca, and the one-which is that;-the mind, the eleventh,
possessed of the power of thinking etc. (see fn. on p. 173). Ca, and;
the panca, five; indriya-gacarah, objects of the senses-such objects as
sound etc. The followers of the Sankhya call these which are such the
twenty-four categories. Thereafter, the Lord now says that even those
alities which the Vaisesikas speak of as the attributes of the sould are
certainly the attributes of the field, but not of the Knower of the
field:
