+++
title = "07 इच्छा द्वेषः"

+++
13.7 Iccha, desire: Having experienced again an object of that kind
which had given him the feeling of pleasure earlier, a man wants to have
it under the idea that it is a source of pleasure. That is this desire
which is an attribute of the internal organ, and is the 'field' since it
is an object of knowledge. So also dvesah, repulsion: Having experienced
again an object of that kind which he had earlier felt as a cause of
sorrow, he hates it. That is this repulsion, and it is surely the
'field' since it is an object of knowledge. Similarly, sukham,
happiness- which is favourable, tranil, having the ality of sattva-is
the 'field' since it is an object of knowledge. Duhkham, sorrow-which is
by nature adverse-, that, too, is the 'field' since it is a knowable.
Sanghatah is the aggregate, the combination, of body and organs. Cetana,
sentience, is a state of the internal organ, manifest in that aggregate
like fire in a heated lump of iron, and pervaded by an essence in the
form of a semblance of Consciousness of the Self. That too is the
'field' because it is an object of knowledge. Dhrtih, fortitude, by
which are sustained the body and organs when they get exhausted-that too
is the 'field' becuase it is an object of knowledge. Desire etc. have
been selected as suggestive of all the alities of the internal organ.
The Lord concludes what has been said: Etat, this; ksetram, field;
savikaram, together with its modifications beginning from mahat
(buddhi); has been samasena, briefly; udahrtam, spoken of. That 'field'
which was referred to as, 'This body is called the field' (1), and is
constituted by the aggregate of the constituents of the field has been
explained in its different forms beginning from the great elements etc.
ending with fortitude. The Knower of the field whose alities are going
to be described, and by realizing which Knower of the field along with
His majesty Immortality follows-of Him, togehter with His attributes,
the Lord Himself will narrate in the verse, 'I shall speak of that which
is to be known' (12). But, for the present, the Lord enjoins the group
of disciplines characterized as humility etc. which lead one to the
knowledge of That (Knower of the field)-that group of humility etc.
which are referred to by the word Knowledge since they lead to
Knowledge, and owing to the existence of which one becomes appropriately
competent for the realization of that Knowable, and being endued with
which a monk is said to be steadfast in Knowledge:
