+++
title = "09 इन्द्रियार्थेषु"

+++
13.9 Vairagyam, non-attachment, the attitude of dispassion;
indriya-arthesu, with regard to objects of the senses, viz sound etc.,
with regard to seen or unseen objects of enjoyment; eva ca, and also;
anahankarah, absence of egotism, absence of pride;
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosa-anudarsanam, seeing the evil in
birth, death, old age, diseases and miseries-seeing the evil in each one
of them from 'birth' to 'miseries'. The evil in birth consists in lying
in the womb and coming out of it; seeing, i.e. thinking, of it.
Similarly, thinking of the evil in death; so also, seeing in old age the
evil in the form of deprivation of intelligence, strength and vigour,
and becoming an object of contempt. In the same way, thinking of the
evil in diseases like headtache etc.; so also with regard to miseries
arising from causes physical, natural and supernatural. Or, duhkha-dosa
may mean the miseries themselves which are evil. Seeing, as before, that
(evil in the form of miseries) in birth etc.-birth is miserable, death
is miserable, old age is miserable, diseases are miserable. Birth etc.
are miserable because they cause misery; not that they are miseries in
themselves. \[Birth etc. are perceivable events, and as such are not
miseries in themselves.\] Thus, when one thinks of the evil in the form
of miseries in birth etc. dispassion arises with regard to the pleasures
in the body, organs and objects. From that follows the tendency of the
organs towards the indwelling Self for the realization of the Self. The
seeing of the evil in the form of misery in birth etc. is called
Knowledge because it thus becomes a cuase of the rise of Knowledge.
Moreover,
