+++
title = "12 अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वन्"

+++
13.12 Adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam, steadfastness in the knowledge of the
Self: adhyatma-jnanam is the knowledge of the Self, etc.; constant
dwelling in that is nityatvam. Tattva-jnanartha-darsanam, contemplating
on the Goal of the knowledge of Reality: Tattva-jnanam is that
(realization of Truth) which arises from the fruition of application to
the disciplines like humility etc. which are the means to knowledge. Its
Goal (artha) is Liberation, the cessation of mundane existence.
Contemplation (darsana) on that is tattva-jnana-artha-darsanam. For,
when one engages in contemplation on the result of the knowledge of
Reality, one gets the urge to undertake the disciplines which are its
means. Etat, this-those that have been stated from 'humility' etc. to
'contemplation on the Goal of the knowledge of Reality'; proktam, is
spoken of; iti, as; jnanam, Knowledge, because they are meant to lead
one to Knowledge. Ajnanam, ignorance; is yat, that which is; anyatha,
other; atah, than this-what has been stated above. Contrarily,
arrogance, pretentiousness, cruelty, revenge, insincerity, etc. are to
be known as ignorance so that, since they are the cause of the
origination of worldly existence, they can be avoided. To the estion as
to what is to be known through the aforesaid Knowledge, the Lord says,
'I shall speak of that which is to be known,' etc. Objection: Do not
humility etc. constitute yama and niyama \[See fn. on p. 239.-Tr.\]; The
Knowable is not known through them. For humility etc. are not seen to
determine the nature of anything. Moreover, everywhere it is observed
that whatever knowledge reveals its own object, that itself ascertains
the nature of that object of knowledge (the knowable). Indeed, nothing
else is known through a knowledge concerning some other object. As for
instance, fire is not known through the knowledge of a pot. Reply: This
is not a defect, for we have said that they are called 'Knowledge'
because they lead one to Knowledge, and because they are auxiliary
causes of Knowledge.
