+++
title = "13 ज्ञेयं"

+++
13.13 Pravaksyami, I shall speak of, fully describe just as it is; tat,
that; yat, which; is jenyam, to be known. In order to interest the
hearer through inducement, the Lord speaks of what its result is:
Jnatva, by realizing; yat, which Knowable; asnute, one attains; amrtam,
Immortality, i.e.; he does not die again. Anadimat, without
beginning-one having a beginning (adi) is adimat; one not having a
beginning is anadimat. What is that; The param, supreme, unsurpassable;
brahma, Brahman, which is under discussion as the Knowable. Here, some
split up the phrase anadimatparam as anadi and matparam because, if the
word anadimat is taken as a Bahuvrihi compound, \['That which has no
(a), beginning (adi) is anadi.' Matup is used to denote possession.
Since the idea of possession is a already implied in anadi, therefore
matup, if added after it, becomes redundant.\] then the suffix mat
(matup) becomes redundant, which is undesirable. And they show a
distintive meaning: (Brahman is anadi, beginningless, and is) matparam,
that of which I am the supreme (para) power called Vasudeva. Trully, the
redundance could be avoided in this way if that meanig were possible.
But that meaning is not possible, because what is intended is to make
Brahman known only through a negation of all attributes by saying, 'It
is called neither being nor non-being.' It is contradictory to show a
possession of a distinctive power and to negate attributes. Therefore,
although matup and a bahuvrihi compound convey the same meaning of
'possession', its (matup's) use is for completing the verse. \[The
Commentator accepts anadimat as a nan-tatpurusa compund. If, however,
the Bahuvrihi is insisted on, then the mat after anadi should be taken
as completing the number of syllables needed for versification. So, nat
need not be compounded with param.\] Having aroused an interest through
inducement by saying, 'The Knowable which has Immortality as its result
is beeing spoken of by Me,' the Lord says: Tat, that Knowable; ucyate,
is called; na sat, neither being; nor is it called asat, non-being.
Objection: After strongly girding up the loins and declaring with a loud
voice, 'I shall speak of the Knowable,' is it not incongruous to say,
'That is called neither being nor non-being'; Reply: No. What has been
said is surely consistent. Objection: How; Reply: For in all the
Upanisads, the Knowable, i.e. Brahman, has been indicated only by
negation of all attributes-'Not this, not this' (Br. 4.4.22), 'Not
gross, not subtle' (op. cit. 3.3.8), etc.; but not as 'That is this',
for It is beyond speech. Objection: Is it not that a thing which cannot
be expressed by the word 'being' does not exist; Like-wise, if the
Knowable cannot be expressed by the word 'being', It does not exist. And
it is contradictory to say, 'It is the Knowable', and 'It cannot be
expressed by the word "being".' Counter-objection: As to that, no that
It does not exist, because It is not the object of the idea, 'It is
non-being.' Objection: Do not all cognitions verily involve the idea of
being or non-being; This being so, the Knowable should either be an
object of a cognition involving the idea of existence, or it should be
an object of a cognition involving the idea of non-existence. Reply: No,
because, by virtue of Its being super-sensuous, It is not an object of
cognition involving either, of the two ideas. Indeed, any object
perceivable by the senses, such as pot etc., can be either an object of
cognition involving the idea of existence, or it can be an object of
cognition involving the idea of non-existence. But this Knowable, being
supersensuous and known from the scriptures, which are the sole means of
(Its) knowledge, is not, like pot etc., an object of cognition involving
either of the two ideas. Therefore It is called neither being nor
non-being. As for your objection that it is contradictory to say, 'It is
the Knowable, but it is neither called being nor non-being,'-it is not
contradictory; for the Upanisad says, 'That (Brahman) is surely
different from the known and, again, It is above the unknown' (Ke. 1.4).
Objection: May it not be that even the Upanisad is contradictory in its
meaning; May it not be (contradictory) as it is when, after beginning
with the topic of a shed for a sacrifice, \[Cf. 'Pracinavamsam karoti,
he constructs (i.e. shall construct) (the sacrificial shed) with its
supporting beam turned east-ward' (Tai, Sam.; also see Sanskrit-English
Dictionary, Monier Williams).-Tr.\] it is said, 'Who indeed knows
whether there exists anything in the other world or not!' (Tai. Sam.
6.1.1); Reply: No, since the Upanisad speaking of something that is
different from the known and the unknown is meant for establishing an
entity that must be realized. \[The Upanisadic text is not to be
rejected on the ground that it is paradoxical, for it is meant to
present Brahman as indentical with one's own inmost Self.\] But,
'৷৷.whether there exists anything in the other world,' etc. is merely an
arthavada \[See note on p. 40. Here, the passage, '৷৷.whether there
exists৷৷.,' etc. is to be interpreted as an arthavada emphasizing, the
need of raising a shed, irrespective of any other consideration.-Tr.\]
connected with an injunction. From reason who it follows that Brahman
cannot be expressed by such words as being, non-being, etc. For, every
word used for expressing an object, when heard by listeners, makes them
understand its meaning through the comprehension of its significance
with the help of genus, action, ality and relation; not in any other
way, because that is not a matter of experience. To illustrate this: a
cow, or a horse, etc. (is comprehended) through genus; cooking or
reading, through action; white or black, through ality; a rich person or
an owner of cows, through relation. But Brahman does not belong to any
genus. Hence it is not expressible by words like 'being' etc.; neither
is It possessed of any alitity with the help of which It could be
expressed through alifying words, for It is free from alities; nor can
It be expressed by a word implying action, It being free from
actions-which accords with the Upanisadic text, 'Partless, actionless,
calm' (Sv. 6.19). Nor has It any relation, since It is one, non-dual,
not an object of the senses, and It is the Self. Therefore it is logical
that It cannot be expressed by any word. And this follows from such
Upanisadic texts as, 'From which, words trun back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc.
Therefore it is logical that It cannot be expressed by any word. And
this follows from such Upanisadic texts as, 'From which, words turn
back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc. Since the Knowable (Brahman) is not an object
of the word or thought of 'being', there arises the apprehension of Its
nonexistence. Hence, for dispelling that apprehension by establishing
Its existence with the help of the adjuncts in the form of the organs of
all creatures, the Lord says:
