+++
title = "14 सर्वतः पाणिपादम्"

+++
13.14 Tat, That-the Knowable; sarvatah-pani-padam, which has hands and
feet everywhere-. The existence of the Knower of the field is revealed
through th adjuncts in the form of the organs of all creatures. And the
Knower of the field is spoken of as such because of the limiting
adjuncts of the field. The field, too, is diversely differentiated as
hands, feet, etc. All diversity in the Knower of the field, caused by
the differences in the adjunct-the field-, is certainly unreal. Hence,
by denying it, the nature of the Knowable has been stated, in, 'That is
called neither being nor non-being.' Although the unreal form is caused
by the limiting adjuncts, still, for the comprehension of Its existence
it is said, '(It) has hands and feet everywhere, etc., by assuming this
as a ality of the Knowable. Thus, as is well known, there is saying of
the people versed in tradition, 'The Transcendental is described with
the help of superimposition and its refutation'. Everywhere the hands,
feet, etc., which are perceived as limbs of all bodies, perform, their
duties due to the presence of the power of the Knowable (Brahman). Thus
the grounds for the inference of the existence of the Knowable are
metaphorically spoken of as belonging to the Knowable. The others have
to be explained similarly. That Knowable has hands and feet everwhere.
That which has eyes, heads, and mouths everywhere is
sarvatoksi-siro-mukham. That which has ears every-where is
sarvatah-srutimat: sruti means the organs of hearing; that which has it
is sruti-mat. Tisthati, It exists, remains established; loke, in the
multititude of creatures; avrtya, by pervading; sarvam, them all. With
this purpose is view, that as a result of the superimposition of the
organs like hands, feet, etc., which are adjuncts, there may not be the
misconception that the Knowable is possessed of them (adjuncts), the
(next) verse is begun:
