+++
title = "15 सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं"

+++
13.15 Sarvendriya-guna-abhasam, shining through the functions of all the
organs: By the use of the words all the organs are understood ears etc.,
known as the sense-organs and motor-organs, as also the internal
organs-the intellect and the mind, for they are eally the limiting
adjuncts of the Knowable. Besides, the organs of hearing etc. become the
limiting adjuncts from the very fact of the internal organ becoming so.
Hence, the Knowable gets expressed through determination, thinking,
hearing, speaking, etc. that are the functions of all the organs,
internal and external, which are the limiting adjuncts. In this way, It
is manifest through the functions of all the organs. The idea is that,
that Knowable appears to be as though active owing to the functions of
all the organs, as it is said in the Upanisadic text, 'It thinks, as it
were, and shakes, as it were' (Br. 4.3.7). For that reason, again, is It
not perceived as being actually active; In answer the Lord says: It is
sarva-indriya-varitam, devoid of all the organs, i.e. bereft of all the
instruments of action. Hence the Knowable is not active through the
functioning of the instruments of action. As for the Upanisadic verse,
'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly and grasps; without eyes He
sees, without ears He hears' (Sv. 3.19), etc.-that is meant for showing
that that Knowable has the power of adapting Itself to the functions of
all the organs which are Its limiting adjuncts; but it is not meant to
show that It really has such activity as moving fast etc. The meaning of
that verse is like that of the Vedic text, 'The blind one discoverd a
gem' (Tai, Ar. 1.11). \[This is an artha-veda (see note on p.530), which
is not to be taken literally but interpreted in accordance with the
context.\] Since the Knowable is devoid of all the instruments of
actions, therefore It is asaktam, unattached, devoid of all
associations. Although It is of this kind, yet it is ca eva, also
verily; the sarva-bhrt, supporter of all. Indeed, everything has
existence as its basis, because the idea of 'existence' is present
everywhere. Verily, even mirage etc. do not occur without some basis.
Therefore, It is sarva-bhrt, the supporter of all-It upholds everything.
There can be this other organs as well for the realization of the
existence of the Knowable: Nirgunam, without ality-the alities are
sattva, rajas and tamas; that Knowable is free from them; and yet It is
the guna-bhoktr, perceiver of alities; i.e., that Knowable is the
enjoyer and experiencer of the alities, sattva, rajas and tamas, which,
assuming the forms of sound etc., transform them-selves into happiness,
sorrow, delusion, etc. Further,
