+++
title = "19 इति क्षेत्रम्"

+++
13.19 Iti, thus; uktam, has been spoken-commencing from 'I shall speak
of that which is to be known' (12) and ending with 'It is spoken of as
beyond darkness' (17); samasatah, in brief; the ksetram, field
-beginning with the 'great elements' and ending with 'for titude' (5,6);
tatha, as also; jnanam, Knowledge-beginning from 'humility' (7) and
ending with 'contemplation on the Goal of the knowledge of Reality'
(11); and the jneyam, Knowable. All this has been stated by way of
summarizing the purport of the Vedas and the Gita. Who is fit for this
true knowledge; The answer is: madbhaktah, My devotee, who attributes
the fact of being the Self of all to Me who am God, Vasudeva, the
Omniscient, the supreme Teacher, (and) whose conviction has been
saturated with the idea that whatever he sees, hears or touches, all
that verily is Lord Vasudeva. Vijnaya, by understanding; etat, this, the
aforesaid true knowledge; he upa-padyate, becomes alified; mad-bhavaya,
for My State (bhava) -the State of being the supreme Self; for that
State of Mine. He attains Liberation. There in the Seventh Chapter have
been presented the two aspects \[Cf. 15.16-18.\] of God, viz the higher
and the lower, characterized as the field and the Knower of the field.
And it has also been said, '(Understand thus) that all things have these
as their source' (7.6). The explanation as to how creatures have the two
aspects, the field and the Knower of the field, as their source is now
being stated:
