+++
title = "20 प्रकृतिम् पुरुषम्"

+++
13.20 Viddhi, know; ubhau, both; prakrtim Nature; and also the purusam,
individual soul;-these two; Nature and the soul. the aspects of God-to
be api, verily; anadi, without beginning. Those two that have no
beginning (adi), are anadi. Since the godhood of God is eternal,
therefore it is logical that even His aspects also should have
eternality. For God's god-hood consists verily in having the two
aspects. Those two aspects through which God becomes the cause of
creation, continuance and dissolution of the Universe, and which are
beginningless, are the sources of mundane existence. Some interpret the
phrase anadi in the tatpurusa \[Tatpurusa: Name of a class of compounds
in which the first member determines the sense of the other members, or
in which the last member is defined or alified by the first, without
losing its original independence.-V.S.A.\] sense of na adi, not primeval
(not cause). (According to them) thery indeed is established the
causality of God. Again, if Nature and soul themselves be eternal, the
mundane existence would surely be their creation, and the causality of
the mundane existence would not be God's. That is wrong because, there
being nothing to rule over before the emergence of Nature and soul,
there will arise the contingency of God ceasing to be God! And if the
mundane state be uncaused \[Uncaused, i.e. not caused by Nature and
soul, but by God independently of those two aspects.\] there arises the
contingency of the absence of Liberation, \[If God were. Himself the
sole cause of mundane existence, independently of His two aspects, then
it would be endless because there would be nothing to prevent liberated
souls from being put under bondage again.\] the scriptures becoming
useless, and the absence of bondage and freedom. On the other hand, all
these become justifiable if God and the two aspects be eternal. How;
Viddhi, know; the vikaran, modifications that will be spoken of-the
intellect etc., the body and the organs; ca eva, as also; gunan, the
alities (sattva etc.)-manifest in the form of the mental states of
happiness, sorrow and attachment; as prakriti-sambhavan, born of Nature.
Nature, Maya, is the power of God, which is the cause of the
modifications and which consists of the three alities. Those
modifications and alities, which have that Nature as their source,-know
those modifications and alities as 'born of Nature', as transformations
of Nature. Which again, are those modifications and alities born of
Nature;
