+++
title = "21 कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे हेतुः"

+++
13.21 Karya-karana-kartrtve, with regard to the source of body and
organs: Karya is the body, and karana are the thirteen \[Five sense
organs, five motor organs, mind, intellect and ego.\] organs existing in
it. Here, by the word karya are understood the aforesaid elements that
produce the body as also the objects which are modifications born of
Nature. And since the alities-which are born of Nature and manifest
themselves as happiness, sorrow and delusion-are dependent on the
organs, (therefore) they are implied by the word karana, organs. The
kartrtvam, (lit) agentship, with regard to these body and organs
consists in being the source of the body and organs. With regard to this
source of the body and organs, prakrtih, Nature; ucyate, is said to be;
the hetuh, cause, in the sense of being the originator. Thus, by virtue
of being the source of body and organs, Nature is the cause of mundane
existence. Even if the reading be karya-karana-kartrtva, karya (effect,
modification) will mean anything that is the transformation of
something; and karana (cause) will be that which becomes transformed. So
the meaning of the compund will be: 'with regard to the source of the
effect and the cause'. Or, karya means the sixteen \[The eleven organs
(five sensory, five motor, and mind) and the five objects (sound
etc.).\] modificaitons, and karana means the seven \[Mahat, egoism, and
the five subtle elements.\] transformations of Nature. They themselves
are called effect and cuase. So far as the agentship with regard to
these is concerned Nature is said to be the cause, because of the same
reason of being their originator. As to how the soul can be the cause of
mundane existence is being stated: Purusah, the soul, the empirical
being, the knower of the field-all these are synonymous; is the hetuh,
cause; bhoktrtve, so far as enjoyership, the fact of being the
perceiver; sukha-duhkhanam, of happiness and sorrow-which are objects of
experience, is concerned. How, again, is it asserted with respect to
Nature and soul that, they are the causes of mundane existence by virtue
of this fact of their (respectively) being the source of body and
organs, and the perceiver of happiness and sorrow; As to this the answer
is being stated: How can there be any mundane existence if there be no
modification of Nature in the form of body and organs, happiness and
sorrow, and cause and effect, and there be no soul, the conscious being,
to experience them; On the other hand, there can be mundane existence
when there is a contact, in the form of ignorance, between
Nature-modified in the form of body and organs, and cause and effect as
an object of experience and the soul opposed to it as the experiencer.
Therefore it was reasonable to have said that, Nature and soul become
the cause of mundane existence by (respectively) becoming the
originators of the body and organs, and the perceiver of happiness and
sorrow. What again is this that is called worldly existence; Worldly
existence consists in the experience of happiness and sorrow; and the
state of mundane existence of the soul consists in its being the
experiencer of happiness and sorrow. It has been asserted that the state
of mundane existence of the soul consists in its being the experiencer
of happiness and sorrow. How does it come about; This is being answered:
