+++
title = "22 पुरुषः प्रकृतिस्थो"

+++
13.22 Hi, since; purusah, the soul, the experiencer; is prakrtisthah,
seated in Nature, which is characterized as ignorance and gets
transformed into body and organs, i.e., (since the soul) has become
identified with Nature; therefore, bhunkte, \[Bhunkte, lit. enjoys, here
means 'experiences'.-Tr.\] it enjoys, i.e. experiences; gunan, the
alities-manifest as happiness, sorrow and delusion; prakrtijan, born of
Nature, thinking thus, 'I am happy, sorrowful, deluded, learned.' Even
though ignorance continues as a cause, still the main cause of worldly
existence, of birth, is the contact, the self-identification, with the
alities-happiness,sorrow, and delusion-when they are experienced, as is
affirmed by the Upanisadic text, 'What it desires, it resolves' (Br.
4.4.5) \[See Sankaracarya's Comm. on this.-Tr.\]. That very fact is
stated here: Gunasangah, contact with the alities; is karanam, the
cause; asya, of its, the soul's, the experiencer's;
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu, births in good and evil wombs.
Self-identification with the alities is the cause of the experience of
births in good and evil wombs. Or the meaning is, 'Self-identification
with the alities is the cause or its worldly existence through birth in
good and evil wombs,' where the words 'of worldly existence' have to be
supplied. The good wombs are he wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are
the wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are the wombs of beasts etc.
From the force of the context it is to be understood that there is no
contradiction in including even human wombs among 'good and evil wombs'.
It amounts to saying that ignorance-called 'being seated in Nature'-and
the contact with. i.e. the desire for, the alities are the causes of
worldly existence. And this is said so that they can be avoided. And in
the scripture Gita it is a well-known fact that knowledge and
dispassion, accompanied with renunciation, are the causes of removing
this (ignorance and self-identification with the alities). That
knowledge about the field and the Knower of the field, too, has been
presented earlier. This has also been said in, '৷৷.by realizing which
one attains Immortality' (12), etc., through the process of refutation
of elements alien (to the Self) and superimposition of alities belonging
to others (that are not the Self). \[Verse 12 deals with the refutation
of alien elements, and vere 13 with the superimposition of alities
belonging to others.\] A direct presentation is again being made of that
(knowledge) itself:
