+++
title = "23 उपद्रष्टाऽनुमन्ता च"

+++
13.23 He who is the upadrasta, Witness, who while staying nearby does
not Himself become involved: As when the priests and the performer of a
sacrifice remain engaged in duties connected with the sacrifice, there
is another (called Brahma) remaining nearby who is unengaged, is versed
in the science of sacrifices and witnesses the merit or demerit of the
activities of the priest and the performer of the sacrifice, similarly,
He who is not engaged in the activities of and is different from the
body and organs, who has characteristics other than theirs, and is the
proximate (upa) observer (drasta) of the body and organs engaged in
their duties, is the upa-drasta. Or: The observers are the body, eyes,
mind, intellect and the soul. Of them the body is the external observer.
Proceeding inwards from that (body), the Self is the inmost as also the
proximate observer, compared with which there is no other higher and
inner observer. The Self, because of being the most proximate observer,
is the upadrasta. Or, It is the upadrasta since, like the non-looker of
a sarifice, It witness everything. And He is the anu-manta, Permitter:
Anumananam, approval, means satisfaction with those performers (viz body
and organs) as also their perfomances. The agent of that (approval) is
the anumanta. Or, He is the anumanta since, even though Himself not
engaged in the activities of the body and organs, He appears to be
favourably disposed towards and engaged in them. Or, He is the anumanta
because, when the body and organs are engaged in their own functions, He
remains as a witness and never dissuades them. It is the bharta,
Sustainer: Bharanam means the continuance in their own state of the
body, organs, mind and intellect, which reflect consciousness and have
become aggregated owing to the need of serving the purpose \[Viz
enjoyment, or Liberation.-Tr.\] of some other entity, viz the conscious
Self. And that (continuance) is verily due to the consciousness that is
the Self. In this sense the Self is said to be the Sustainer. It is the
bhokta, Experiencer: As heat is by fire, similarly, the experiences of
the intellect-in the form of happiness, sorrow and delusion in relation
to all objects-, when born as though permeated by the consciousness that
is the Self, are manifested differently by the Self which is of the
nature of eternal Consciousness. In this sense the Self is said to be
the Experiencer. He is maheswarah, the great God, because, as the Self
of all and independent, He is the great Ruler. He is paramatma, the
transcendental Self, because He is the Self which has the
characteristics of being the supreme Witness etc. of (all)
those-beginning from the body and ending with the intellect-which are
imagined through ignorance to be the indwelling Self. He is api ca,
also; uktah, spoken of, referred to, in the Upanisads; iti, as, with the
words; 'He is the indwelling One, the paramatma, the transcendental
Self.' \[Ast reads atah in place of antah. So the translation of the
sentence will be: Therefore He is also referred to as the transcendental
Self in the Upanisads.-Tr.\] Where is He; The parah, suprem; purusah,
Person, who is higher than the Unmanifest and who will be spoken of in,
'But different is the supreme Person who is spoken of as the
transcendental Self' (15.17); is asmin, in this; dehe, body. What has
been presented in, '৷৷.also understand Me to be the Knower of the field'
(2), has been explained and conclude.
