+++
title = "24 य एवम्"

+++
13.24 Sah yah, he who; vetti, knows, in the manner described; the
purusam, Person, that Self possessed of the characteristics stated
above, as 'I myself (am That)'; and knows prakrtim, Nature as described
above, which is characterized as ignorance; to have been eradicated by
Knowledge, saha, along with; gunaih, the alities which are its
modifications; na abhijayate, will not be born; bhuyah, again-after the
fall of this body of the man of realization, he does not become born
again for (taking) another body, i.e. he does not take up another body;
sarvatha api, in whatever way; vartamanah, he may live. From the word
api it is understood that, it goes without saying that one who is firm
in his own duty is not rorn. Objection: Though it has been said that
there is absence of rirth after the dawn of Knowledge, still is not
illogical that actions done (in the present life) before the rise of
Knowledge and those done subseently, as also those done in the many past
lives, should be destroyed without yielding their results; Hence there
should be three births! For destruction of acired merit is not logical,
to the same extent as actions that have produced the present birth and
are yielding their proper results (cannot be destroyed). Besides, it is
not understood that actions have distinctions \[Since all actions arise
from ignorance, they are on the same level so far so they are opposed to
Knowledge; i.e., there can be no such distinction among actions as
'those which have started yielding results' and 'those that have
not'.\]. Therefore, the actions of the three kinds, without exception,
will produce three births or they all collectively will produce one
birth. Otherwise, if the acired merits become destroyed, it will lead to
loss of faith everywhere as well as to the purposelessness of
scriptures. Therefore it has been illogical to say, 'he will not be born
again.' Reply: No, for the burning away of all the actions of the man of
knowledge has been stated in hundreds of Upanisadic texts such as: 'And
all one's actions become dissipated' (Mu. 2.2.8); 'Anyone who knows
(that supreme) Brahman, becomes Brahman' (op. cit. 3.2.9); 'For him the
delay is for so long only (as he does not become freed)' (Ch. 6.14.2);
'As the fibres at the tip of a blade of reed (become completely
burnt৷৷.,' so) all actions 'get completely burnt' (op. cit. 5.24.3).
Here too the burning of all actions has been stated in, 'as a blazing
fire reduces pieces of wood to ashes,৷৷.'etc. (4.37), and He will also
say so (later) \[See 18.66: 'I shall free you from all sins,'
etc.-Tr.\]. This accords with reason also. Verily, actions, which arise
from the seed of evils \[Klesas, evils-see note under 8.19-Tr.\] like
ignorance and desires, germinate the sprout of rirth. Here also it has
been said by the Lord in various places that actions which are
associated with egoism and desire for results bear fruits, not the
others. And there is also the verse: 'As seeds burnt by fire do not
germinate, so also the Self does not acire another body due to evils
that have been burnt by Knowledge (cf. Mbh. Va. 199. 107). Objection: It
may be granted for the present that actions performed after the rise of
Knowledge are burnt by Knowledge, since they coexist with Knowledge. But
the burning away of actions done in this life prior to the rise of
Knowledge and those done in the many past lives is not reasonable.
Reply: No, because of the alification, 'all actions' (4.37). Objection:
May it not be that 'all actions' means those that are undertaken after
Illumination; Reply: No, for there is no reason for the restriction (of
the meaning). On the other hand, as for the statement, 'just as actions
that have produced the present birth and are already active in producing
their results do not get dissipated even after Illumination, similarly
it is not reasonable that actions which have not commenced producing
their results should get dissipated,'-that is wrong. Objection: Why;
Reply: Since they have already begun producing results, like an arrow
that has been shot: As an arrow, freed earlier from a bow for hitting a
target, even after piercing through the target comes to a stop only
after falling down as a result of the dissipation of its initial
momentum, similarly, actions that produced the (present) body verily
continue, even after fulfilling the purpose of maintaining the body, to
exist as before until the dissipation of their inherent tendencies. But,
as that very arrow, when it has not acired the momentum, needed for
action, when it has not been shot even though fixed on the bow, can be
withdrawn, similarly, actions which have not begun yielding their
results may be rendered unproductive by Knowledge, even while existing
in their receptacle. \[The internal organ bearing the reflection of
Consciousness.\] Hence, it is established that , it has been reasonable
to state that on the fall of the present body of an enlightened person,
'He is not born again.' Here are being presented these meditation etc.
which are the alternative means for the realization of the Self:
