+++
title = "25 ध्यानेनात्मनि पश्यन्ति"

+++
13.25 Dhyanena, through meditation: Meditation means contemplation (on
the Self) after withdrawing into the mind with concentration the organs
of hearing etc. from the objects like sound etc., and then withdrawing
the mind into the indwelling conscious Self. Thus, from the citation of
such illustrations as, 'the crane meditates, as it were, 'the earth
meditates, as it were; the mountains meditate, as it were' (Ch. 7.6.1),
it follows that meditation is a constant and uninterrupted current of
thought like a line of pouring oil. Through that meditation, kecit, some
yogis; pasyanti, realize; the indwelling conscious atmanam, Self;
atmani, in (their) intellect; atmana, with the help of the internal
organ that has been purified by meditation. Anye, others; sankhyena
yogena, through Sankhya-yoga: Sankhya means thinking, 'These alities,
viz sattva, rajas and tamas, are objects of my perception; I am the
Self, distinct from them, a witness of their functions, eternal and
different from the alities.' This Sankhya is Yoga. \[By Sankhya is meant
that knowledge which arises from the foregoing reflection. This
knowledge is itself called Yoga (concentration of mind) inasmuch as it
is similar to Yoga in leading to the realization of the Self.\] Through
that they realize the Self with the help of the internal organ. This is
how it is to be construed. And anye, others; karma-yogena, through
Karma-yoga-action itself being the Yoga: Action performed with the idea
of dedication to God is figuratively called Yoga since it leads to Yoga.
(others realize) with the help of that (action), through purification of
the mind and rise of Knowledge. \[The best among the yogis are competent
for meditation (dhyana); the modiocre for reflection (Sankhya); and the
lowest for Karma-yoga.\]
