+++
title = "27 यावत्सञ्जायते"

+++
13.27 Bharatarsabha, O scion of the Bharata dynasty; yavat kincit,
whatever; sattvam, object;-as to whether they are without exception the
Lord says-sthavara-jangamam, moving or non-moving; sanjayate, comes into
being; viddhi, know; tat, that; as originating
ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogat, from the association of the field and the
Knower of the field. Objection: What, again, is meant by this
'association of the field and the Knower of the field'; Since the Knower
of the field is partless like space, therefore Its conjunction with the
field cannot be a kind of relationship like coming together of a rope
and a pot through the contact of their parts. Nor can it be an intimate
and inseparable relation as between a thread and a cloth, since it is
not admitted that the field and the Knower of the field are mutually
related by way of being cause and effect. Reply: The answer is: The
association of the field and the Knower of the field-which are the
object and the subject, respectively, and are of different natures-is in
the form of superimposition of each on the other an also of their
alities, as a conseence of the absence of discrimination between the
real natures of the field and the Knower of the field. This is like the
association of a rope, nacre, etc. with the superimposed snake, silver,
etc. owing to the absence of discrimination between them. This
association of the field and the Knower of the field in the form of
superimposition is described as false knowledge. After having known the
distinction between and the characteristics of the field and the Knower
of the field according to the scriptures, and having separated, like a
stalk from the Munjagrass, the above-described Knower of the field from
the field whose characteristics have been shown earlier, he who realizes
the Knowable (i.e. the Knower of the field)-which, in accordance with
'That is neither called being nor non-being' (12), is devoid of all
distinctions created by adjuncts- as identical with Brahman; and he who
has the firm realization that the field is surely unreal like an
elephant created by magic, a thing seen in a dream, an imaginary city
seen in the sky, etc., and it appears as though real-for him false
knowledge becomes eradicated, since it is opposed to the right knowledge
described above. Since the cause of his rirth has been eliminated.
therefore what was said in, 'He who knows thus the Person and Nature
along with the alities৷৷.', that the man of realization is not born
again (23), has been a reasonable statement. In 'He৷৷.will not be born
again' (23) has been stated the result of right knowledge, which is the
absence of birth owing to the destruction of ignorance etc., the seeds
of worldly existence. The cause of birth, viz the association of the
field and the Knower of the field brought about by ignorance, has also
been stated. Hence, although right knowledge, which is the remover of
that ignorance, has been spoken of, still it is being stated over again
in other words:
