+++
title = "28 समं सर्वेषु"

+++
13.28 Sah, he; pasyati, sees; yah, who; pasyati,
sees;-whom;-parameswaram, the supreme Lord-the Lord who is supreme as
compared with the body, organs, mind, intellect, the Unmanifest and the
individual soul; as tisthantam, existing, having His presence; samam,
eally, without distinction;-where;-sarvesu, in all; bhutesu, beings, all
living things from Brahma to the non-moving;-he who sees Him existing
eally in all living things. The Lord specifies them by the word
vinasyatsu, among the perishable; and He also specifies Him, the supreme
Lord, by the word avinasyantam, the Imperishable. This is meant for
showing the absolute difference between the living things and God. How;
For, all the modifications \[See note 3 on p.38.-Tr.\] of an existing
thing have as their root that modification of an existing thing
described as birth. All other modifications of existing things that
follow birth end with destruction. After destruction there is no
modification of an existing thing, because the object itself becomes
nonexistent. Indeed, alities can exist so long as the thing alified
exists. Therefore, by the reiteration of the absence of the last
modification of an existing thing, all its preceding modifications
become negated along with their effects. Hence it is established that
the supreme Lord is very greatly different from all beings, and is also
Unconditioned \[Free from all modifications that things are subject
to.\] and One. He sees who thus sees the supreme Lord as described.
Objection: Is it not that all poeple see; What is the need of
specification; Reply: True, they see; but they see contrarily! Hence the
Lord specifies, 'He alone sees'. As in comparison with one who,
suffering from the (eye) disease called Timira, sees many moons, the
person who sees one moon is distingusihed by saying, 'He alone sees,'
similarly, here as well, the man who sees the one undivided Self as
described above is distinguished from those who contrarily see many and
differentiated selves, by saying 'He alone sees'. Others, though seeing,
do not see because they see contrarily like the person who sees many
moons. This is the meaning. The obove-described true knowledge has to be
praised by stating its result. Hence the verse begins:
