+++
title = "29 समम् पश्यन्हि"

+++
13.29 Hi, since; pasyan, by seeing, by realizing; samam, eally; isvaram,
God, i.e., (by realizing Him) as described in the immediately preceding
verse; who is samavasthitam, present alike; sarvatra, everywhere, in all
beings;-what follows from seeing eally;-he na, does not; hinasti,
injure; his own atmanam, Self; atmana, by the Self, by his own Self;
tatah, therefore, as a result of that non-injuring; yati, he attains;
the param, supreme; gatim, Goal, called Liberation. Objection: Is it not
that no creature whatsoever injures himself by himself; Why do you refer
to an irrelevant thing by saying, 'He does not injure৷৷.,which is like
saying, 'Fire should neither be lit on the earth nor in the sky,' etc.;
Reply: This defect does not arise, because it is logical with reference
to an unenlightened person's ignoring the Self. For, all unillumined
people ignore the very wellknown Self which is manifest and directly
perceptible, and regard the non-Self as the Self. By performing
righteous and unrighteous acts they destroy even that self which has
been accepted, and adopt another new self. And destroying even that,
they take up another. Similarly, destroying even that, they adopt
another. In this way they destroy the self that had been accepted
successively. Thus, all unillumined persons are destroyers of the Self.
But that which is the Self in reality, even that remains as though
destroyed for ever by ignorance, because of the absence of any benefit
from Its presence. So, all unenlightened persons are, verily, destroyers
of the Self. On the contrary, the other person who has realized the Self
as described does not injure in either way \[i.e. either through
superimposition or through non-super-imposition.\] the Self by his own
Self. Therefore he attains the supreme Goal, i.e., the result stated
above comes to him. Lest it be doubted that what was said in, 'seeing
eally God who is present in all beings, he does not injure the Self by
the Self, is improper with regard to the selves which are diverse
according to the differences created by the variety in their own alities
and actions, the Lord says:
