+++
title = "32 अनादित्वान्निर्गुणत्वात्परमात्मायमव्ययः"

+++
13.32 Anadivat, being without beginning: Adih means cause; that which
has no cause is anadih. That which has a cause undergoes loss of its own
characteristics. But this One, being causeless, has no parts. This being
so, It does not suffer loss. So also, nirgunatvat, being without
alities: indeed, It si only something possessing alities that perishes
owing to the losss of its alities. But this One, being without alities,
does not perish. Hence, ayam, this; paramatma, supreme Self; is avyayah,
immutable. It suffers no depletion. Therefore It is immutable. Since
this is so, therefore, api, although; sarira-sthah, existing in the
body-since the perception of the Self occurs in the bodies, It is said
to be 'existing in the body'; even then, It na, does not; karoti, act.
From the very fact that It does not act, It na, is not; lipyate,
affected by the result of any action. For, one who is an agent of action
becomes affected by its result. But this One is not an agent. Hence It
is not affected by any result. This is the meaning. Objection: Who is
it, again, that acts in the body and becomes affected; On the one hand,
if there be some embodied being other than the supreme Self who acts and
becomes affected, then it has been improper to say in, 'And also
understand Me to be the Knower of the field,' etc., that the Knower of
the field and God are one. Again, if there be no embodied being who is
different from God, then it has to be stated who is it that acts and
gets affected. Or it has to be asserted that the supreme One does not
exist. \[If the supreme One also acts like us, then He is no God.\]
Thus, since the Upanisadic philosophy as stated by the Lord is in every
way difficult to understand and difficult to explain, it has therefore
been abandoned by the Vaisesikas, the Sankhyas, the Jainas and the
Buddhists. Reply: As to that, the following refutation has been stated
by the Lord Himself in, 'But it is Nature that acts' (5.14). Indeed,
Nature, which is nothing but ignorance, acts and becomes affected. In
this way empirical dealing becomes possible; but in reality it does not
occur in the one supreme Self. It has been accordingly shown by the Lord
in various places that there is no duty to be performed by those who
adhere to this philosophy of discriminating knowledge of the supreme
Reality, who are steadfast in Knowledge, who have spurned actions
arising out of ignorance, and who are mendicants belonging to the
highest Order of monks. The Lord cites an illustration to show like what
It does not act and is not affected:
