+++
title = "+129"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

एकादशेऽनुवाके त्रयोविंशतिसंख्याकानि सूक्तानि। तत्र ‘नासदासीत्’ इति सप्तर्चं प्रथम सूक्तं त्रैष्टुभम्। परमेष्ठी नाम प्रजापतिर्ऋषिः। वियदादिभावानां सृष्टिस्थितिप्रलयादीनामत्र प्रतिपाद्यत्वात् तेषां कर्ता परमात्मा देवता। तथा चानुक्रान्तं- ‘नासत्सप्त प्रजापतिः, परमेष्ठी भाववृत्तं तु’ इति। गतो विनियोगः॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

129 (955)  
Creation  
Prajāpati Parameṣṭhin  
7 verses: triṣṭubh  
This is one of the most famous hymns of the R̥gveda, and one of the most signifi cant for later Indian cosmogonies. Because it is elusive and suggestive rather than  directly narrative, it has given rise to a wide variety of interpretations. The interpre tation we offer here follows the more extensive discussion in Brereton (1999), which  also refers to earlier literature and alternate interpretations.  
If this is a cosmogonic hymn, it is certainly a strange one, because the last verse  does not come to a conclusion but ends with a question. This incompleteness is  formally marked by both metrical and syntactic irregularities. The meter of verse  7b is two syllables short, leaving the its hearers to anticipate two beats that are not  there, and the syntax of 7d is incomplete since the poem ends with a relative clause  without a main clause. A close look at the rest of the hymn explains the reason for  these poetic strategies.  
In verse 1 there is a progression from negations—what existed was neither exist ing nor nonexisting and neither space nor heaven existed—to questions (1c) to  possibilities (1d). Verse 2 also begins with negation, here the negation of death,  deathlessness, and the signs of night and day. The only narrative progress is the  greater specificity in verse 2 about what is negated: there are no mortals or immor tals, there is no moon or sun. But whereas 1cd continued with questions and pos sibilities, 2cd provides an answer to the question of what existed: there existed “that  One,” which “breathed without wind.” In 1c the poet asked what “stirred,” or more  literally what “moved back and forth,” and in 2c the implicit answer is that the  “breathing” of the One moves back and forth. If 2c answers the question of 1c and  indeed if verse 2 defines what verse 1 suggests, then “that One” in verse 2 is the pre viously undefined thing that was neither existent nor nonexistent in verse 1.  
Verse 3 sharpens the sense that nothing is happening, nothing material at least. It  apparently starts over once again: 3a ends “in the beginning” (ágre) just as 1a ends  

“at that time” (tadā́nīm) and 2a “then” (tárhi). But where verses 1 and 2 asked ques tions or only hinted at answers, 3a asserts that there was something, namely “dark ness” covered by darkness, and 3c describes a “thing coming into being” (ābhú) covered by “emptiness.” In verse 3, therefore, “that One” still does not have sub stance, but it is beginning to have shape, since there is something that is “covered”  
by something. As Thieme (1964: 66–67) has observed, that shape is the shape of  an egg, and it is this egg-like shape that in 3d “was born” or hatched through heat. Thus far there has been little development of substance, although there has been  an evolution of concept. An unidentified subject that neither exists nor does not  exist is introduced in verse 1. It has taken conceptual form as the “One” in verse  2, and finally assumed an egg-like shape in verse 3. In verse 4 there is a shift that  apparently breaks the continuity of the hymn. According to 4ab, thought gives rise  to desire, which is concretized as the “primal semen,” the origin of beings. However,  there is one thing that connects verses 3 and 4 and maintains the hymn’s continu ity: “desire” in 4a corresponds to “heat” in 3d. If so, then “thought” in 4b should  correspond to the “One” in 3d. And so it does, for “thought” is the hidden metaphor  in verses 1–3. In verse 1 it is thought that neither exists nor does not exist, because  thought is something real but at the same time something not real, since it is not  externally perceptible. Or, to put it another way, thought has shape but no sub stance, as verse 3 says. This hymn, therefore, shows an omphalos structure, in which  the middle verse, in this case verse 4, contains the key to the hymn. Here that key is  the revelation that thought is the One, which is the ultimate source of creation. It  is not surprising, therefore, that the “connection” (bándhu) between “existing” and  “not-existing,” the connection that is thought, was discovered by poets “though  inspired thinking” (manīṣā́, 4d). In verse 5 this “connection” also becomes a divid ing “cord” (raśmí) and through it there emerges the distinction between males (the  placers of semen and the offering) and females (“greatnesses,” i.e., pregnancies, and  independent will).  
But even if thought is the ultimate and primal creative act, the origin of the  world is still unknown, even by the gods (vs. 6c). If there is an overseer of the world,  he might know, or he might not (vs. 7cd). The lack of an answer means that “think ing” will not come to an end. The poem ends with metrical and syntactic irresolu tion and with a question in order that its hearers are left thinking and in that way  left repeating the fundamental act of creation, the act of thinking.
</details>
