+++
title = "+040"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘रथं यान्तम्' इति चतुर्दशर्चमेकादशं सूक्तं काक्षीवत्या घोषाया आर्षं जागतमाश्विनम् । ‘रथं यान्तम् ' इत्यनुक्रान्तम् । प्रातरनुवाकाश्विनशस्त्रयोरुक्तो विनियोगः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

40 (866)  
Aśvins  
Ghoṣā Kākṣīvatī  
14 verses: jagatī  
As suggested in the introduction to X.39, we two translators have different  interpretations of the ritual context for this pair of hymns. Accordingly we  have contributed contrastive, signed discussions of the hymn’s context in this  introduction.  
SWJ  
As already noted, the hymn begins with a mention of the Aśvins’ chariot journey  (vs. 1) and indeed continues with speculations on their whereabouts (vss. 2–3) and  a description of our attempts to attract them to our sacrifice (vs. 4). These verses  contain vivid imagery, especially the contrastive pictures of sexual pairing in verses  2–3 (see also X.39.14c, which is a mirror image of 40.2d).  
These erotic images prepare the way for the scenes of apparent betrothal and  marriage that follow (vss. 5–11). These verses open with the speech of a woman  identified as Ghoṣā, whose status as king’s daughter contrasts with that of the  bereft, unnamed woman who speaks in X.39.5 (see the introduction to that hymn).  Ghoṣā boldly addresses the Aśvins themselves and demands to know if they will  “be there” for her (vs. 5). The scene sketched is, in my opinion, a Svayaṃvara or  woman’s “self-choice” marriage. The stage has been set for this in verse 3d, where  the Aśvins are described as coming to soma-pressings “like kings’ sons” (rājaputrā́).  

This tatpuruṣa compound is found only here in the R̥gveda and would neatly iden tify the Aśvins as appropriate suitors coming to a Svayaṃvara, where the woman  making the choice would likewise be a king’s daughter (5b). Her unabashed speech,  questioning them about their suitability as husbands and supporters, would be fit ting in a Svayaṃvara context.  
The next verses (6–8) seem to depart from the marriage theme, and it is not  possible to be certain that they are spoken by Ghoṣā. I believe they are, however,  because the marital theme continues beneath the surface: verses 5–7 contain four  somewhat problematic instances of the preverb pári “around” (5a, 6a, 6c, 7c), in  the same metrical position, but in awkwardly unidiomatic verbal lexemes. The  problems they cause for the translator are seen in the somewhat “off” English that  represents them. This intrusive pári is, in our opinion, an insistent reminder of the  wedding context, evoking one of the important parts of the wedding ceremony, the  circumambulation of the fire, and also evoking the consummation of the marriage,  the embrace of the bride, found close to the end of these wedding verses, in 10d “the  wives are to be embraced (pariṣvajé).”  
Ghoṣā’s likely speech ends with verse 8, ostensibly praising the Aśvins for “giv ing freedom/wide space” to various individuals and opening up an enclosure with  all the characteristics of the Vala cave, a deed not usually attributed to the Aśvins.  The wide space created and the opening up of the enclosure can (perhaps fancifully)  be taken metaphorically here, in this wedding context, for the deflowering of the  virgin bride.  
The following two verses (9–10) return to the narrator/poet and describe the  wedding itself, but develop the theme identified in the previous verse. In the first  pāda of verse 9 the maiden is born—presumably born into womanhood, after the  “opening up” just performed. The “little lad” in flight in the same pāda may be her  bridegroom, or even a pet diminutive for his penis. The next two pādas (9bc), with  sprouting plants and flowing rivers, are generally interpreted as expressing nature’s  approval of the marriage; in contrast we again consider them metaphorical, express  
ing the advent of sexual maturity and sexual awakening. The sprouting sprouts of  pāda b remind us of the maiden Apālā’s prayer that her pubic hair would grow along  with the plants in the fields (VIII.91.5–6); the rivers of pāda c might either be her  first menstrual blood, the blood from her deflowering, or sexual fluids produced  by arousal. This verse ends with the same phrase that Ghoṣā used in her question  to the Aśvins, “be there for the day,” but with a reversal of genders (the bride will  be there for her husband, as Ghoṣā asked the Aśvins to be there for her), followed  by the triumphant “this is marriage!” While verse 9 treats marriage as an intimate  exchange between the two principals, verse 10 brings us back to the social aspects of  marriage: the exchange relation created between the families and the effort required  to bring it about. The mysteries of sex are, mysteriously, touched on in verse 11.  
The hymn ends with three verses (12–14) more conventionally addressed to the  Aśvins with requests for goods and aid, though the final verse (14) echoes the ques tions about the whereabouts of the Aśvins that began the hymn. JPB  
An alternate view of the ritual context of X.39–40 is that both hymns find a place  in an Atirātra, an Overnight Soma Sacrifice, in the morning rites that conclude the  ceremony. In these rites, which are a continuation of the rites of the Third Pressing  from the previous evening, the Aśvins return in the morning of the second day to  receive a last offering of soma. The references to the night between evening and  morning oblations (e.g., X.40.2), to the soma offerings (X.39.4, 40.13, 14), and, of  course, to the Aśvins, to whom both hymns are dedicated, accord with the ritual  context of an Atrirātra.  
One of the themes of the Third Pressing in the classical soma rites is the fertil ity of the sacrificing couple. Since this is a relatively late hymn, the Wife of the  Sacrificer may already have been a participant in the rite for which these hymns  were composed. Therefore, the hymns might have been an appeal to the Aśvins to  help make the marriage of the sacrificing couple a success by giving them a son.  Thus, the “little lad” who “has taken flight” in the puzzling verse 9 might be the  hoped-for child, whose birth marks the success of their marriage. His “flight” can  refer to his conception; the image of an embryo “flying” to the womb also occurs  in X.162.3. For a detailed study of the hymn that reflects this interpretation, see  Brereton 2013.
</details>
