+++
title = "03 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
8.3 The Lord said That which is the Supreme Imperishable (Aksara) has
been named 'that brahman' The Aksara is that which cannot be destroyed
and forms the totality of all individual selves. The Srutis say to this
effect: 'The Avyakta is dissolved into the Aksara, the Aksara is
dissolved into Tamas' (Su. U., 2). The supreme Aksara is the essential
form of the self, separated from Prakrti. One's own material nature (the
body) is spoken of as Adhyatma or that which dwells with the self. This
material nature (Svabhava) is Prakrti. It does not form the self but
attaches itself to the self in the form of subtle elements, impressions
etc. This has been taught in the Vidya of Five Fires (Cha. U., 5). Both
these (the Aksara and the Adhyatma) should be known by the aspirants for
liberation (Kaivalya) - the former as what should be attained and the
latter as what should be relinished. Karma is that force which produces
the origination of mundane beings. 'Beings' here means beings such as
the human beings. The creative force which produces their origination is
contact with woman. It has been described in the Sruti passage thus:
'The waters sacrificed in the fifth oblations become those who are named
Purusas' (Cha. U., 5.3.3). That creative force is called Karma. All the
acts associated with that should be considered by aspirants after
release as calling for abstention. This abstention will also be
inculcated immediately in the text, 'Desiring which they practise the
vow of continence' (8.11).
