+++
title = "04 अधिभूतङ् क्षरो"

+++
8.4 The perishable existences which have been declared as fit to be
known by the seekers of wealth, power etc., form the Adhibhuta. They are
superior material entities that remain in ether or space and other
elements. They are the evolutes of material elements and are perishable
in their nature. They are also of the nature of sound, touch etc.,
supported by their basic subtle elements but different from, and finer
than, ordinary sound etc., and are of many kinds. Sound, touch, form,
taste and smell on this kind, which are manifold and rooted in their
several bases, are to be gained by the seekers after prosperity and
should be contemplated upon by them. Adhidaivata connotes Purusa. The
Purusa is superior to divinities like Indra, Prajapati and others, and
is the experiencer of sound etc., which are different from, and superior
to, the multitude of enjoyments of Indra, Prajapati etc. The condition
of being such an enjoyer is to be contemplated upon by the seekers after
prosperity, as the end to be attained. I alone am connoted by the term
Adhiyajna (sacrifice). Adhiyajna denotes one who is propitiated in
sacrifices. Indra and others, to whom sacrifices are made, form My body.
I dwell as their Self and I alone am the object of worship by sacrifice.
In this manner the three groups of alified devotees should contemplate
at the time of the practice of periodical and occasional rituals like
the great sacrificies. This is also common to all the three groups of
devotees.
