+++
title = "19 भूतग्रामः स"

+++
8.19 The same multitude of beings, controlled by Karma, evolves again
and again, undergoing dissolution at the coming of night. Again at the
coming of the day it comes forth. Similarly, at the end of the life span
of Brahma which consists of a hundred years of three hundred and sixty
days each, each Brahma-day being a thousand Caturyugas, all the worlds
including that of Brahma and Brahma himself dissolve into Me in
accordance with the order thus described in the Srutis: 'The earth is
dissolved into the waters, the waters are dissolved into light' etc.,
(Su. U., 2). The process of involution ends, after passing through all
the other stages of dissolution, with the Avyakta, Akasa and Tamas.
Therefore, for every other entity except Myself, origination and
annihilation are unavoidable. So for those who seek Aisvarya (prosperity
and power) birth and dissolution according to the above mentioned time
arrangement are unavoidable. But in the case of those who attain to Me,
there is no return again to Samsara. \[The immense duration of time,
according to ancient thinkers, is as follows: Catur-yuga, or a unit of
the four yugas of Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali, has a cumulative
duration of 4,320,000 human years. A thousand such periods constitute a
day time of Brahma and a similar period his night. Periodic creation and
dissolution of the universe take place in these two periods
respectively. One year of Brahma consists of 360 such diurnal period. A
Brahma has a life-span of 100 such years - i.e., 311, 040, 000,000,000
human years. At the end of it, there is a Mahapralaya, and a new Brahma
comes into being. Time thus goes on endlessly\]. Now Sri Krsna teaches
that there is no return to Samsara even for those who have attained
Kaivalya (isolation of the self).
