+++
title = "21 अव्यक्तोऽक्षर"

+++
8.20 - 8.21 Superior, as an object of human end, to this unmanifest
(Avyakta), which is inanimate Prakrti, there is another state of being,
of a kind different from this, but also called Avyakta. It has only
knowledge-form and is also unmanifest. It is the self, Atman. It is
unmanifest because It cannot be apprehended by any means of knowledge
(Pramanas). The meaning is that Its nature is unie and that It can be
known only to Itself. That is, It can be understood only vaguely in the
ordinary ways of knowing. It is eternal, namely, ever-enduring, because
It is not subject to origination and annihilation. In texts like 'For
those who meditate on the imperishable, undefinable, the unmanifest'
(12.3) and 'The imperishable is called the unchanging' (15.16) - that
being the self. It has been called the unmanifest (Avyakta) and
imperishable (Aksara); when all material elements like ether, etc., with
their causes and effects are annihilated, the self is not annihilated in
spite of It being found alone with all the elements. \[The elements are
what constitute the bodies of beings.\] The knowers of the Vedas declare
It as the highest end. The meaning is that the imperishable entity which
has been denoted by the term 'highest goal' in the passage, 'Whosoever
abandons the body and departs (in the manner described) reaches the
highest state (Dhama)' (8.13), is the self (Atman) abiding in Its
essential nature free from the contact with the Prakrti. This self,
which abides thus in Its essential nature, by attaining which It does
not return, - this is My 'highest abode,' i.e., is the highest object of
My control. The inanimate Prakrti is one object of My control. The
animate Prakrti associated with this inanimate Prakrti is the second
object of My control. The pristine nature of the freed self, free from
contact with inanimate matter, is the highest object of My rule. Such is
the meaning. This state is also one of non-return to Samsara. Or the
term 'dhama' may signify 'luminosity'. And luminosity connotes
knowledge. The essential nature of the freed self is boundless
knowledge, or supreme light, which stands in contrast to the shrunken
knowledge of the self, when involved in Prakrti. \[The description given
above is that of Kaivalya, the state of self-luminous existence as the
pure self\]. Sri Krsna now teaches that the object of attainment for the
Jnanin, is totally different from this:
