+++
title = "11 यतन्तो योगिनश्चैनम्"

+++
15.9-11 Srotram etc. upto asetasah. Mind : the internal organ is hery
implied. Hence, due to His association of the bodily existence, when He
remains \[in the body\], or rises up to seize another body, or enjoys
the sense objects - at that time the deluded persons do not perceive
Him, because they are not well enlightened. But, considering everything
as manifestation of the \[Self\] awareness, the highly enlightened men
recognize Him. Thus they are men of unbroken contemplation. Because they
are engrossed in their exertion. But in the case of those who have not
mastered their self (mind), even their effort does not yield any fruit,
because their passion has not yet been fully decayed. Indeed the seeds
of corn, sown during the autumnal season are not capable of yielding a
rich harvest, even though the means like water etc., get collected
together. Therefore, it (the water etc.) does not constitute a
collection of means. Indeed totally different is the water sent forth by
the mass of clouds that had been filled up in the month of Madhu.
Altogether different is the earth that had been under the grip of the
Cold-season (Sisira) and has (now) brilliance by the simple touch of the
sun-rays. In the same way, the effort of the men of uncontrolled self,
never gets to the stage of fulfilment of all reisities . That is why
those who, even after receiving the means like the inititation etc.
necessary for the realisation of the Supreme Lord, continue to have
their inner vision filled with the collection of the knots (granthi) of
anger, bewilderment etc., in the manner as before-in their case, even
the means does never bear any fruit. This must be borne in mind. For, it
is has been said : 'When anger etc., are seen, then even the initiated
one never gets emancipation'.
