+++
title = "14 अहं वैश्वानरो"

+++
15.12-14 Yad aditya-etc. upto caturvidham. While clarifying the role
\[of the Lord\] as the Creator, Sustainer and Destroyer - a role that
has been indicated in the Tenth Chapter - by \[the description of Him as
identical with\] the triple luminories like the sun etc., our venerable
preceptor has rightly said : The present passage declares that the
power, the pentad of elements has \[both\] collectively and
individually, to sustain the world, is the Absolute power of the
Bhagavat Himself. For instance : The sunlight has the power of
illumining and sustaining, because the twin elements of the fire and the
earth are one \[with the Bhagavat\]. This has been started by the twin
hemistitches '\[That light\] which is found in the sun etc.' and 'And by
penetrating the earth etc.' The moon-light is illumining and nourishing
because of its assoication of the elements of the earth, the water and
the fire \[with the Bhagavat\]. That has been stated by the portion
'\[That light\] which is in the moon' and by the hemistitch 'Being the
sapful moon I nourish all plants'. The light of fire is, however, of the
nature of illumining, parching, burning, sweating and ripening (or
cooking). It is so because of the association of the elements, the
earth, the water, the fire and the wind \[with the Bhagavat\]. The same
has been said here by the portion, '\[That light\] which is in the fire'
and also by the \[entire verse\] 'I, being the digestive fire etc.' But
the \[element\] ether is no doubt all pervaisve (inclusive), because it
is of the form of room which is nothing but awareness. Therefore, having
so far explained the nature \[of the Absolute Self\] as the object of
knowledge, now, with a view to show the Self to be conscious of the
freedom that remains as a background (or substratum) of that very nature
of object of knowledge; to be of transcending nature; to be the Supreme
Lord; to be independent in all knowledges; and to be the Creator of all;
\[the Lord\] says -
