+++
title = "15 सर्वस्य चाहम्"

+++
15.15 Sarvasya etc. The heart (core) of all obejcts is the Awareness
which has the freedom of drawing in all \[beings within itself\] In it
exists \[as identical with it\] the I-consciousness. From This are born
(1) the faculty knowing, which is illumining anything new - a faculty
which is (hence) in the form the mighty creation of the universe; (2) he
faculty of differentiating, like fancying 'This is nothing but a pot',
which fancying is in essence a sort of limiting Its status of being
everything; which is suitable for the perceiver, full-of-Illusion in the
form of creating a bonded Soul; and (3) also the faculty of remembrance
which is the faculty of reilluminating what has been reduced ot mental
impression and has been \[thus\] with-drawn. These \[three\] are
inclusive of all \[sorts of\] knowledge. Thus \[the Lord's primary\]
doership, which is nothing but the sovereignty of will and which
presupposes His ominscience, has been taught \[in this verse here\]. By
means of all \[the Vedas\] etc. : Indeed nothing, but the Supreme Lord
is to be explained and proved by all the scriptures. \[The description
of the Lord\] as the author of the Vedas and the ends of the Vedas
(Upanisads) amounts to say this :- The Bhagavat alone has got the
sovereign freedom in creating the entire universe, through the medium
for the actions, their results, their \[mutual\] connections etc., and
in re-establishing it on His (or its) own nature after rooting it out.
Thus the Lord's creatorship with regard to the universe is explained.
Others say : The word apohanam denotes the faculty of excluding (viz),
'This results from this non-performance.' \[Again Vedantakrt\] means :
'He effects the final part of the Vedas' i.e৷৷ by absorbing them into
Himself. Similarly \[with\] 'the Vedas' too.
