+++
title = "20 इति गुह्यतमम्"

+++
15.20 Iti etc. The most secret \[scripture\] : Because it explains the
oneness of all. One becomes a man of wisdom by knowing this only and not
by the knowledge of worldly affairs. One becomes a man of success by
just understanding this, and not even by the deeds like the total
victory over the foes, earning wealth, enjoying women and so on. The
word ca 'also' indicates a wonder. Has it not been witnessed that
\[always\] one becomes a man of success by what has been accomplished ;
But it is strange that \[in the present case one becomes a man of
success\] by just what has been realised. The word iti 'thus' indicates
the conclusion of the treatise. For, what is to be taught has come to an
end completely. That is why in the Sixteenth Chapter the eligibility of
the pupil, Arjuna, is exclusively dealt with; and nothing new is taught.
The intention \[of that chapter\] is to say only this much : 'The divine
wealth is just of that nature; but the devilish wealth born of illusion
is of this nature; you (Arjuna) are however endowed with the divine
wealth of wisdom'. Hence \[the Lord\] is going to say 'Don't worry.
\[You are endowed\] with the divine wealth' (XVI, 5). That is why
earlier in the context of explaining the clash between the wisdom and
ignorance this has been indicated \[by me (Ag.)\]: 'It is the
confrontation between the wisdom and ignorance that has been detailed
under the pretext of \[describing\] the wars between the gods and
devils.' So, while dealing essentially with the ality of a pupil, other
subjects are mentioned incidentally. So also the pair of chapters (Ch.
XVII & XVIII) would follow. But the teaching \[proper\] has come to an
end completely here itself. For what is to be achieved is nothing but
serving (attaining) the Absolute Lord-the serving, which is of the
nature of total absorption into Him by one's entire being. All other
things are only to achieve this end. This has been explained earlier.
The Supreme Happiness is indeed nothing but a complete absorption into
the Supreme Lord by one's entire being.
