+++
title = "27 इच्छाद्वेषसमुत्थेन"

+++
7.27 Iccha-dvesa-samutthena, by what arises from likes and dislikes:
iccha, likes, and dvesa, dislikes, are iccha-dvesau; anything arising
from them is icchadvesa-samutthah. (Creatures are duluded) by that. By
what; When that is thus sought to be known in particular, the Lord
answers: dvandva-mohena, by the delusion of duality. Delusion (moha)
that originates from duality (advandva) is dvandva-moha. Those very
likes and dislikes, which are mutually opposed like heat and cold, which
relate to happiness and sorrow and their causes, and which come into
association with all beings in due course, are termed as duality (and
this deludes all creatures). As regards them, when likes and dislikes
arise from the experience of happiness, sorrow and their causes, then,
by bringing the wisdom of all beings under their control, they create
bewilderment which is the cause of the impediment to the rise of
knowledg about the reality of Self, the suprem Truth. Indeed, exact
knowledg about objects even in the external world does not arise in one
whose mind is overpowered by the defects, viz likes and dislikes. It
goes without saying that knowledge of the indwelling Self, beset with
many obstacles as it is, does not arise in a completely bewildered
person whose intelligence has been overcome by them. Therefore, bharata,
O scion of the Bharata dynasty; owing to that delusion of duality
arising from likes and dislikes, sarvabhutani, all creatures become
deluded. Parantapa, O destroyer of foes; they yanti sammoham, become
bewildered, come under delusion; sarge, at the time of their birth, i.e.
at the time of their origination. The idea is that all creatures that
come into being do so prepossessed by delusion. 'Since this is so,
therefore all creatures, being deluded and having their wisdom
obstructed by that delusion of duality, do not know Me who am their
Self. Hence, they do not adore Me as their Self.' 'Who, again, are those
that, becoming free from the delusion of duality, come to know You, and
adore You as the Self in accordance with the scriptures;' In order to
elaborate the subject enired about, it is being said:
