+++
title = "001 मनुम् एकाग्रम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Great Sages, having approached Manu, paid their respect to him in due form, and finding him seated with mind calm and collected, addressed him these words—(1).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वेदान्तवेद्यतत्त्वाय  
जगत्त्रितयहेतवे ।  
प्रध्वस्ताशेषदोषाय  
परस्मै ब्रह्मणे नमः ॥ १ ॥

चतुर्भिः पदश्लोकैर् विशिष्टकर्तृत्वम् अनन्यप्रमाणवेद्यपुरुषार्थोपदेशकत्वं चास्य शास्त्रस्य प्रपाद्यते प्रतिष्ठार्थम् । प्रतिष्ठिते हि शास्त्रे कर्तृभिः स्वर्गयशसी प्राप्येते यावत् संसारम् अनपायिनी च भवतः । शास्त्रं च प्रतिष्ठां लभते यदि तत्र केचिद् अध्ययनश्रवणचिन्तनादिषु प्रवर्तन्ते । न च बुद्धिपूर्वव्यवहारिणो ऽध्ययनादिष्व् अनवधृतप्रयोजनाः प्रवर्तितुम् अर्हन्ति । अतः "पुरुषार्थसिद्धाव् उपायपरिज्ञानार्थम् इदं शास्त्रम् आरभ्यते" इत्य् एतत् प्रतिपादनार्थं श्लोकचतुष्टयम् आचार्यः पपाठ । 

- <u>न च वाच्यम्</u>- अन्तरेणैवादितः प्रयोजनवचनं वक्ष्यमाणशास्त्रपौर्वापर्यपर्यालोचनयैवेदं पर्यवस्यामः किं तत्प्रतिपादनार्थेन यत्नेनेति । किं च । उक्तम् अपि प्रयोजनं यावत् परस्तान् नावमृष्टं तावन् न निश्चीयते । न हि सर्वाणि पुरुषवचांस्य् अर्थे निश्चयनिमित्तम् । न चैष नियमः सर्वत्र प्रयोजनपरिज्ञानपूर्विकैव प्रवृत्तिः स्वाध्यायाद्ययने ऽतन्निबन्धनायाः प्रवृत्तेर् दर्शनात् । पौरुषेयेष्व् अपि ग्रन्थेषु नैव सर्वेषु प्रयोजनाभिधानम् आद्रियते । तथा हि । भगवान् पाणिनिर् अन्नुक्त्वैव प्रयोजनम् "अथ शब्दानुशासनम्" इति सूत्रसंदर्भम् आरभते । 

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । आरम्भे ऽनवधृतप्रयोजना नैव प्रथमतो ग्रन्थम् उपाददीरन् । अनुपादानाच् च कुतः शास्त्रं कार्त्स्न्येन पर्यालोचयेयुः । किं च पौर्वापर्यपर्यालोचनया यो ऽर्थो बुद्धिगोचरताम् आवहति स एव त्व् आदितः संक्षेपेणोच्यमानः सुग्रहो भवति । तद् उक्तम्-

- इष्टं हि विदुषां लोके समासव्यासधारणम् । इति ।

- <u>यत् तु</u> "उक्तम् अपि न निश्चीयते पौरुषेयेभ्यो वाक्येभ्यो ऽर्थनिश्चयाभावात् । एवम् एवायं पुरुषो वेदेति प्रत्ययो न त्व् एवमर्थः" इति । <u>नात्र</u> विवदामहे निश्चयो ऽस्ति नास्तीति । ग्रन्थगौरवप्रसङ्गात् । अर्थसंशये ऽपि प्रवृत्तिसिद्धौ नियतविषयसंशयोत्पत्तिर् नान्तरेण प्रयोजनवचनम् । अनुक्ते हि किम् इदं धर्मशास्त्रम् अर्थशास्त्रं काकदन्तपरीक्षादिलक्षणरूपं वेत्य् अपि संशयः स्यात् । अभिहिते तु प्रयोजने "अयं तावद् एवम् आह नः ऽश्रेयसः पन्थानं दर्शयामि; इति । न च मे प्रवृत्तस्य काचित् क्षतिर् अस्ति । भवतु, पर्यालोचयामि" इति प्रवृत्तिसिद्धिः ।

- या तु स्वाध्यायाध्ययने प्रवृत्तिः साचार्यप्रयुक्तस्य, न स्वाधिकारप्रतिपत्त्या । न हि तदानीं बालत्वात् स्वाधिकारं प्रतिपत्तुम् उत्सहते । परप्रयुक्त्यैव च प्रवृत्तिसिद्धिः । नाधिकारप्रतिपादनेनापि चावेद्यते । अतस् तत्र प्रवृत्तस्य प्रयोजनम् अर्थावबोधो ऽतश् च प्रवृत्तिः । इह तु, 

- यो ऽनधीत्य द्विजो वेदम् अन्यत्र कुरुते श्रमम् । (म्ध् २.१६८) 

इति गृहीतवेदस्याध्ययनाधिकारः । तदानीं चाभ्युत्पन्नबुद्धित्वात् प्रयोजनम् अन्विच्छति । भगवतः पुनः पाणिनेर् अतिसंक्षिप्तानि सूत्राणि । नैवार्थान्तराभिधानपरत्वाशङ्का । तत्र आकुमारं च यशः पाणिनेः प्रख्यातम् इति सुप्रसिद्धप्रयोजनत्वाद् अनुपन्यासः । अयं तु विततो ग्रन्थो ऽनेकार्थवादबहुलः सर्वपुरुषार्थोपयोगी । तत्र सुखावबोधार्थे प्रयोजनाभिधाने न किंचित् परिहीणम् ।

- द्वये च प्रतिपत्तारो न्यायप्रतिसरणाः प्रसिद्धिप्रतिसरणाश् च । तत्र "मनुर् वै यत् किंचावदत् तद् भेषजम्" इति (म्स् २.१.५) । 

- ऋचो यजूंषि सामानि मन्त्रा आर्थर्वणाश् च ये ।

- सप्तर्षिभिस् तु यत् प्रोक्तं तत् सर्वं मनुर् अब्रवीत् ॥

इत्याद्यर्थवादेतिहासपुराणादिभ्यः प्रख्यातप्रभावो लोके तत्प्रसिद्ध्यैव वा निरूपितमूलपातेन प्रजापतिनैतत् प्रणीतम् इत्य् एतावतैव श्रोत्रियाः प्रवर्तन्त इति । तान् प्रति कर्तृविशेषसंबन्धो ऽपि प्रवृत्त्यङ्गम् । अत एव च प्रश्नप्रतिवचनभङ्ग्या प्रयोजनोपन्यासः । महर्षयः प्रष्टारः प्रजापतिर् वक्ता, धर्मलक्षणश् चार्थो न लोकावगम्यः शास्त्रैकगोचरो ऽयम् । यत्र महर्षयो ऽपि संशेरत इत्य् एवंपर आदेशो ऽपि । स तैः पृष्ट इति नाहं पृष्ट इति । तथात्मनो ब्रह्मणो ऽकृत्रिमप्रतिमत्वं चेत्य् एवमादिः । तद्व्युत्पादनार्थो युक्तः शास्त्रारम्भ इति श्लोकचतुष्टयस्य तात्पर्यम् ।

- यथा चानेन पुरुषार्थोपदेशपरता शास्त्रस्योच्यते तथा पदार्थयोजनात् प्रतिपादयिष्यामः । 

- तत्र मनुम् अभिगम्य महर्षय इदं वचनम् अब्रुवन्- "धर्मान् नो वक्तुम् अर्हसि" (म्ध् १.२) इति । स पृष्टः प्रत्युवाच- "श्रूयताम्" इति (म्ध् १.४) । एवं प्रश्नप्रतिवचने एकार्थप्रतिपादके तात्पर्येण भवतः । अतो धर्मा अत्र प्रतिपाद्यन्त इत्य् उक्तं भवति । धर्मशब्दश् च लोके श्रेयःसाधने प्रत्यक्षादिभिर् लौकिकैः प्रमाणैः शब्दाद् इतरैर् अविहिते प्रयुज्यते । अतः स श्रूयताम् इति संबन्धे विशिष्टपुरुषार्थसाधनत्वम् उक्तं भवति । 

- मनुर् नाम कश्चित् पुरुषविशेषो ऽनेकवेदशाखाध्ययनविज्ञानानुष्ठानसंपन्नः स्मृतिपरंपराप्रसिद्धः । तम् **अभिगम्य** आभिमुख्येन तत्समीपं गत्वा, व्यापारान्तरत्यागेन न यदृच्छया संगम्य । अनेन चाभिगमनप्रयत्नेन पृच्छ्यमानवस्तुगौरवं वक्तुश् च प्रामाण्यं ख्याप्यते । न ह्य् अकुशलः प्रतिवचने यत्नेन पृच्छ्यन्ते आगत्य । 

- **एकाग्रम् आसीनम्** एकाग्रं स्थितम् एकाग्रं सन्तम् । न त्व् अत्र बृस्याद्युपवेशनम् आसनम् अनुपयोगात् । आसनेन स्वस्थवृत्तिता लक्ष्यते । तथाभूतः प्रतिवचनसमर्थो भवति । अभिगम्येति केवल एव मनुः कर्म । प्रश्नक्रियायास् त्व् एकाग्रम् आसीनम् इति विशेषणम् । कुशलप्रश्नानुरूपकथाप्रवृत्त्यादिनैकाग्रम् अविक्षिप्तमनस्कं ज्ञात्वा प्रश्नश्रवणे दत्तावधानम् इदं वचनम् अब्रुवन् । 

- एकाग्रशब्दो रूढ्या निश्चलताम् आह । प्रत्याहारेण परिहृतरागादिदोषसंसर्गस्य विकल्पनिवृत्तौ तत्त्वावबोधचिन्तायां मनसः स्थैर्यम् एकाग्रता । तथाभूत एव च संनिहितरूपशब्दादिविषयावधारणे योग्यो भवति, न सदसद्विकल्पयुक्तः । अथ वा योगतो ऽग्रशब्दो मनसि वर्तते, अर्थग्रहणे चक्षुरादिभ्यो ऽग्रगामित्वात् । प्रथमप्रवृत्तियुक्तः पुरःसरो लोके ऽग्र उच्यते । एकस्मिन् ध्येये ग्राह्ये वाग्रम् अस्येति विग्रहः, व्यधिकरणानाम् अपि बहुव्रीहिर् गमकत्वात् । अत्रापि व्याक्षेपनिवृत्तिर् एवैकाग्रता ।

- **प्रतिपूज्य यथान्यायम्** । न्यायः शास्त्रविहिता मर्यादा । ताम् अनतिक्रम्य यादृशी सास्त्रेणाभिवादनोपासनादिका गुरोः प्रथमोपसर्पणे पूजा विहिता तथा पूजयित्वा भक्त्यादरौ दर्शयित्वा । 

- **महर्षयः** । ऋषिर् वेदः, तदध्ययनविज्ञानतदर्थानुष्ठानातिशययोगात् पुरुषे ऽप्य् ऋषिशब्दः । महान्तश् च ते[^१] ऋषयश् च । तेषाम् एव गुणानाम् अत्यन्तातिशयेन महान्तो भवन्ति । यथा "युधिष्ठिरः श्रेष्ठतमः कुरूणाम्" इति । अथ वा तपोविशेषात् पूजाख्यातिविशेषाद् वा महान्तः ।


[^१]:
     M G: ye

- **इदं वचनम् अब्रुवन्** । उच्यते ऽनेनेति वचनम् । वक्ष्यमाणं द्वितीयश्लोकप्रश्नवाक्यम् इति, तद् एव प्रत्यासन्नत्वाद् इदम् इति प्रतिनिर्दिशति । येषाम् अपि प्रत्यक्षवस्तुप्रतिनिर्देशक इदंशब्दस् तेषाम् अपि बुद्धिस्थत्वात् प्रश्नस्य प्रत्यक्षता । अथ वोच्यत इति वचनं पृच्छ्यमानं वस्त्व् अब्रुवन्, वाक्यपक्ष इदं वाक्यम् उच्चारितवन्तः । कर्मसाधने तु वचनशब्द इदम् अपृच्छन् । द्विकर्मकश् च तदा ब्रूञ् अकथित्कर्मणा मनुना । तिसृणां क्रियाणां मनुः कर्म ॥ १.१ ॥

_अभिगम्य प्रतिपूज्य किं अब्रुवन्न् इत्य् अपेक्षायां द्वितीयः श्लोकः ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Salutation to the Supreme Brahman! His real character can be known only
from the Vedānta texts; He is the cause of the three worlds; and He
destroys all evil.

The first four verses describe the fact of the treatise being the work
of a highly qualified author, and of its providing instructions bearing
upon such ends of man as are not knowable by means of any other source
of knowledge; and this is done for the purpose of indicating its
importance (and raising it in the estimation of men). When a treatise
has secured high position in the estimation of men, its author obtains
fame, and also heaven; and both these continue to exist as long as the
world exists. A scientific treatise, has its position established only
when people engage in studying, in listening to lectures on, and in
pondering over, it. Intelligent persons cannot undertake the said study,
etc., until they have satisfied themselves as to the purposes served by
them. It is for this reason that, the Teacher has composed the four
verses with a view to point out that the Treatise is put forth for the
purpose of making known the means of accomplishing the ends of man.

It would not be right here to argue as follows:—“Even without the
purpose of the Treatise being stated at the very outset, we could easily
ascertain what that purpose is, by examining the several parts of the
Treatise going to be propounded; what then is the use of making an
effort to describe that purpose? Further, even if the purpose is stated
at the very outset, one cannot bo sure of it until be has fully examined
the subsequent portions of the Treatise; as a matter of fact, all the
assertions that a man may make do not always bring conviction. Nor is it
necessary that every undertaking must be preceded by the knowledge of
purposes served by it; for instance, we find pupils undertaking the
study of the Veda, without knowing beforehand the purposes to be served
by that study. In the works of human authors also, the practice of
stating the purpose is not always followed. For instance, the revered
Pāṇini begins hi s Sutras with the words ‘Now follows the teaching of
words,’ without having stated the. purpose to be served by his
treatise.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—Unless people have ascertained
the purpose served by a particular Treatise, they would not, in the
first place, take it up at all; and unless they take it up, how could
they examine the whole of it? Then again, that same idea which is got at
by the examination of the entire Treatise, becomes more easily
comprehended if it has been briefly indicated in the beginning. It is
with reference to this that there is the assertion that—‘in ordinary
experience, the learned always consider it desirable to carry ideas in
their minds briefly as well as in greater detail.’

As regards the argument that—“even when the purpose has been stated
there can be no certainty about it, for the simple reason that we do not
derive conviction from the words of human beings,—in whose oase the idea
that we have is that this man knows the matter as he says, and not that
the fact is really as he asserts,”—our answer is that we do not quarrel
over the question as to whether the words of human

beings do, or do not, bring about conviction; because discussion over
this question would swell the size of our work. But as a matter of fact,
even though it is possible for a man to have recourse to a certain
course of action, even when he is in doubt as to the exact purpose
served by it,—yet until there is some statement as to the purpose served
by a particular action, even doubts could not arise in regard to it. In
fact, if some statement had not been made in regard to the purpose to be
served by the present Treatise, the doubt that would arise in men’s
minds would be (not as to whether or not it was going to serve any
useful purpose, but) as to whether it is a treatise on Law or on
Economics, or an aimless attempt in the nature of an examination of such
subjects as the ‘Crow’s teeth’ and the like. On the other hand, when the
aim of the work has been stated, the idea arising in our minds is—‘the
author of this work asserts that he is going to show us the path leading
to our welfare,—there is no harm done by our undertaking the study of
the work,—well, let us look into it’; and forthwith we take up the work.

Next as regards the case (cited by the opponent) of pupils taking up
Vedic study (without being told of the exact purpose to be accomplished
thereby),—the fact of the matter is that the action of the pupil is due
to his being urged to it by his Teacher, and not to his recognition of
the fact that if behoves him to take up the study (for the
accomplishment of any purpose of his own); in fact being quite a child
at the time (of beginning Vedic study), it is not possible for him to
have any idea as to his being entitled to the study (by virtue of his
having an aim that could be served only by that study); and his
activity, therefore, is brought about entirely by the direction of
another person (his Teacher); who does not bewilder him by pointing out
to him that he is entitled to take up the study; and when once the boy
has taken up Vedic study (entirely under advice of his Teacher), the
motive for further study is provided by the desire to know the meaning
of the Vedic texts studied; and thus the study continues to be carried
on. \[This is the case with the study of the Veda.\] As regards the
study of the present Treatise (on Law), only such persons are entitled
to it as have already studied the Veda, as is clearly indicated by the
text—‘the twice-born person who, without having studied the Vedas,
devotes his energies to other subjects \[becomes a Shudra\]’ (Manu,
2.168); and by that time the pupil has his intelligence aroused, and
consequently seeks to know wbat purpose is to be served by any further
action that he is going to undertake.

As regards the revered Pāṇini, his aphorisms are extremely brief; so
that there is no possibility of their having any other meaning (or
serving any other purpose) than the one directly expressed by them; and
further, the fame of Pāṇini is well known to even the smallest boy; so
that the purpose served by his work is too well known to need
reiteration. The present treatise (of Manu) on the other hand is on an
extensive scale, abounding in several (commendatory and condemnatory)
‘Descriptions,’ and it helps in the accomplishment of all human ends; so
that if its aim is stated in easily intelligible words, there is no harm
done.

Of enquirers (and students) there are two classes,—one following
reasoning, and another following tradition. The former of these take up
the study of Manu; because they know the importance and greatness of the
author and his work from such texts as—‘whatever Manu said is wholesome’
(*Kāṭhaka*, 11.5), and ‘Manu has said all that has been said in the
Ṛgveda, the Yajurveda, the Sāmaveda and the Mantras of the Atharva, as
also by the Seven Great Sages.’ And those of the latter class undertake
it merely under the influence of the tradition, the source of which they
have carefully investigated—that the treatise has been composed by
Prajāpati himself. And for the sake of such persons, the mentioning of
the name of the Author also is a factor leading to action (towards s
tudy).

It is for these reasons that we have here the laying out of the aim of
the Treatise, in the form of question and answer: The Great Sages are
the questioners, Prajāpati is the expounder, and the subject is
*Dharma*, which being not amenable to the ordinary means of knowledge,
can be known only from the *Śāstras* (Scientific Treatises),—it is so
difficult that even the Great Sages have doubts in regard to it. That
Prajāpati is the actual expounder is indicated by the words of the text
itself, which says—being questioned by them,’ and not ‘I, being
questioned by them’; and of himself again Manu speaks (12.123) as being
the natural image (representative) of Brahmā. Thus an effort is
necessary for the expounding of the Law. Such is the sense of the first
four verses.

In what manner the present Treatise is made up of Instructions bearing
upon the ends of man we shall show by the interpretation of the words of
the text.

Now, in the text we have tho declarations—(l) ‘the Great Sages, having
approached Manu, said to him—‘do please expound to us the Duties of
Man,’ and (2) ‘being thus questioned by them, He said—‘*listen*’; and
these two—the question and its answer—in their import, are expressive of
the one idea that *the Treatise expounds the Dharmas*; (he word ‘Dharma’
is in common parlance used in the sense of that means of accomplishing
one’s good which is not cognisable by any of the ordinary means of
knowledge, with the sole exception of ‘word.’ Hence when it is said
‘listen to Dharma,’ what is meant is that what is going to be expounded
is conducive to the fulfilment of the higher ends of man.

‘*Manu*’ is the name of a particular person known, in long-continued
tradition, as having studied several Vedic texts, as knowing their
meaning and as practising the precepts therein contained;—‘*Eating
approached*’ him, *i.e*., having gone forward near him, intentionally,
giving up all other actions, and not by mere chance, having met with him
the special effort made by the Sages to get near Manu shows the
importance of the subject-matter of their question, as also the
authoritative and trustworthy character of the expounder; a man who is
not capable of rightly expounding a subject is never questioned by
persons going up to him for that purpose.—‘*Whose mind was calm and
collected*’—‘*Seated* *with mind calm and collected*,’—*i.e*., whose
mind was in a tranquil state; and it does not mean ṭhat he was actually
seated upon a mat, or some such seat; os there would be no point in
stating this; in fact the word ‘seated’ merely connotes *calmness*; it
is only when one’s mind is calm that he is capable of answering
questions.—‘*Having approached*’—has for its object simply ‘Manu’;
‘*seated with mind calm and collected*’ being an adverbial clause
modifying the act of ‘questioning’ (by the sages). The sense of the
sentence thus is—‘they said to him the following words, on finding, from
the manner in which he engaged into conversation with them in making
enquiries about their welfare, that his mind was not preoccupied, but
calm and collected, and he was therefore attentive to their
questioning.’

The term ‘*ekāgra*,’ by ordinary usage, connotes what is meant by (he
term is *steadiness of the mind*, it being concentrated upon the
contemplation of the knowledge of truth, following upon the cessation of
all doubts and illusions of the person in whom the contact of all
defects of passion and the like is set aside by inhibition. It is only
when one h as his mind in this condition that he is capable of
apprehending sound and other objects that lie within reach of his
senses; which is not the case when he is in doubt as to the object being
a real entity or otherwise.—Or, etymologically the term ‘*agra*’ denotes
the *mind*, by reason of the fact that in the act of apprehending things
it is the Mind that *goes before (agragāmi*) the Eye and other
sense-organs; and in ordinary parlance that which *acts first* or *goes
ahead*, is called ‘*agra*’;—so that the compound ‘*ekāgra*’ is to be
expounded as ‘he who has his *agra*, or Mind, fixed upon one perceptible
object’; there being nothing incongruous in a Bahuvrīhi Compound being
taken, if its sense demands it, as referring to things that are not
co-existent. By this explanation also ‘*ekāgra*’ connotes *absence of
distraction*.

‘*Saving paid their respects in due form*’—‘Due form’ stands for the
rule prescribed in the scriptures; and they did not transgress any such
rule; the scriptures have laid down the rule that on first approaching
his Teacher, the pupil should offer his obeisance, attend upon him, and
so forth; and it was in this prescribed manner that the sages *paid
their respects* to Manu; which means that they showed due devotion and
respect.

*The great sages*.— The word ‘*ṛṣi*’ means the *Veda*; and the word
‘*ṛṣi*’ is applied also to a person, by virtue of his possessing
excellent knowledge of the Veda and all that is prescribed therein and
acting up to these. The *Ṛṣis*, sages, who approached Manu, were
*great*; the said persons become ‘great,’ when the above-mentioned
qualities become developed in them to a very high degree; just as
Yudhiṣṭhira is called the ‘greatest of the Kurus’ (because he possessed,
jn a very high degree, the qualities that distinguished the members of
the Kuru-race).—Or the sages may be regarded as ‘great,’ by virtue of
their superior austerities, or of the great respect and fame enjoyed by
them.

‘*They addressed these words*’—‘*Vacana*’ is *that by which something is
spoken of*; this refers to the question formulated in the second verse;
these being the *nearest* ‘words’ are what are referred to by the
pronoun ‘these.’ Some people have held that the pronoun ‘this’ always
refers to something directly perceived at the time; for these people
also the question may bo regarded as ‘perceived,’ on account of its
being present in the mind.—Or ‘*vacana*,’ may mean *that which is spoken
of*; and in that case it would stand for the *subject-matter questioned
about*. If it be taken as referring to the *sentence* (and, not to the
subject-matter), then the meaning would be that ‘they pronounced this
sentence.’—If the term ‘*vacana*’ means *that which is spoken of*, the
sense is that ‘they asked the following question’; and in that case the
verb ‘*abruvan*,’ ‘addressed,’ would have two objects,—‘Manu’ being the
indirect object. In fact, Manu is the object of all the three verbs in
the sentence (*approach*, *pay respects to* and *address*).—(1).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pratipūjya*’—has been taken by Kullūka to mean also after mutual
salutations’; and be has taken ‘*yathānyāyam*’ with ‘*abravīt*.’
Sarvajñanārāyaṇa takes it to mean ‘*pratyekam pūjayitvā*’, having
honoured them severally’.

*Medhātithi* (p. 1, 1. 18) curiously ascribes the assertion ‘*atha
śabdānuśāsanam*’ to Pāṇini, not to Patañjali.

P. 2, 1. 4—appears to favour the *Prābhākara* view in regard to the
*Śastrārambha* (vide *Prabhākara-Mīmāṃsa*). But on p. 73, 1. 20, the
*Bhāṭṭa* view is also accepted.

P. 2, 1. 12.—‘Whatever Manu said &c.,’—This text occurs in several
Saṃhitas in varying forms, where it refers to the secred (sacred?) texts
‘seen’ by Manu. But there is nothing to prevent the deduction being
drawn that tins declaration proves the antiquity of the ‘Law of Manu’,
though it need not be exactly in the form in which it has been handed
down to us by Bhṛgu and his pupils.

P. 2, 1. 13.—‘Manu has said &c.’—“*ṛco yajūṃṣi*” &c.—The second half of
this verse is quoted by Bidder (XIV) as “*maharṣibhistu tatproktaṃ
smārtaṃ tu manurabravīt*”, and translated as ‘the Vedas were proclaimed
by the great sages, but the *Smārta*, or traditional lore, by Manu.’ It
is strange that Buhler did not notice that such a statement as this
would not add very much to Manu’s claims to exceptional honour. The
right reading of the verse is, as we find in the printed texts of
Medhātithi, *saptarṣibhistu yatproktaṃ tu(?) sarvammanurabravīt*,’ ‘the
Ṛk verses......... and all that has been declared by the seven
sages,—all this has Manu expounded’. This would mean that the work of
Manu contains all the teachings that had gone before him.

P. 3, 1. 11.—‘Having paid their respects’, &c.—*pratipūjyā
yathānyāyam*—The commentaries on this expression throw a curious light
on their own relative antiquity: Medhātithi explains it simply
as—*yādṛśī śāstreṇābhivādanopāsanādikā guroḥ prathamopasarpaṇe pūjā
vihitā tathā pūjayitvā*—and he does not seek to Emphasise and explain
the anomaly involved in the teacher being a ‘Kṣatriya’ and the
questioners ‘Brāhmaṇas’, and the latter offering *pūjā* to the former.
Kullūka has tried to tone down the anomaly by explaining *pratipūjya* as
*pūjitāḥ santaḥ pūjāṃ kṛtvā*—‘They offered the *pūjā* after they had
themselves received the *pūjā* due to themselves;’ and Rāghavānanda goes
a step farther and explains as *yathānyāyam* as “*nyāpo'tra kṣatriyeṣu
brāhmaṇādīnāṃ na namaskāraḥ kintu vākapūjā* \|”

P. 3, 1. 13.—‘*The word ṛṣi means the Veda*’—The word ‘*ṛṣi*’ is
explained by Medhātithi as a synonym for the *Veda*, and in his Bhāṣya
on verse 11 below he actually uses the word in that sense. According to
him the term *primarily* denotes the *Veda*, and only *secondarily the
person who possesses special knowledge of the Veda*.

P. 2, l. 23—‘*Dharmaśabdaśca*—This is a paraphrase of Jaimini’s
definition *codanālakṣaṇo'rtho dharmaḥ*
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	The great sages approached Manu, who was seated with a collected mind, and, having duly worshipped him, spoke as follows:
</details>
