+++
title = "002 भगवन् सर्ववर्णानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

May Thou, O blessed One, explain to us, in due form and in proper order, the duties of all castes and intermediate castes!—(2).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ऐश्वर्यौदार्ययशोवीर्यादौ भगशब्दः । सो ऽस्यास्तीति, मनुः । तेन संबोधनं भगवन्न् इति । वर्णशब्दश् च तिसृषु ब्राह्मणादिजातिषु वर्तते । सर्वग्रहणं शूद्रावरोधार्थम् । इतरथा महर्षीणां प्रष्टृत्वात् त्रैवर्णिकविषये च प्रश्नः कृतः स्यात् । अन्तरं तन्मध्यम् । द्वयोर् जात्योः संकराद् एकाप्य् अपरिपूर्णा जातिः । अन्तरे प्रभव उत्पत्तिर् येषां ते **अन्तरप्रभवाः** अनुलोमप्रतिलोमा मूर्धावसिक्ताम्बष्ठक्षत्तृवैदेहिकादयः[^२] । न हि ते मातापित्रोर् अन्यतरयापि जात्या व्यपदेष्टुं युज्यन्ते । यथा रासभाश्वसंयोगतः खरो न रासभो नाश्वो जात्यन्तरम् एव । अतः वर्णग्रहणेनाग्रहणात् पृथग् उपादीयन्ते । 


[^२]:
     J : vaidehaka

- <u>ननु</u> अनुलोमा मातृजातीया इष्यन्ते । <u>नेति</u> ब्रूमः । सदृशान् एव तान् आहुर् इति मातृजातिसदृशास् ते न तज्जातीया एव । सो ऽप्य् एषां धर्मो वाचनिको न वस्तुस्वभावसिद्धः । अतः प्रमाणान्तरगोचरत्वाद् धर्मपक्षपतितत्वे शास्त्रोपदेशार्हा एव । प्रतिलोमानाम् अप्य् अहिंसादयो धर्मा वक्ष्यन्ते । यत् तु धर्महीना इति तद्व्रतोपवासादिधर्माभावाभिप्रायेण । सर्वपुरुषोपकारिता चानेन शास्त्रस्य प्रदर्श्यते ।



> **यथावत्** । "अर्हत्य् अर्थे वतिः" येन प्रकारेणानुष्ठानम् अर्हति । इदं नित्यम् इदं काम्यम् इदम् अङ्गम् इदं प्रधानं द्रव्यदेशकालकर्त्रादिनियमश् च प्रकारो ऽर्हतेर् विषयः ।   
> अनुपूर्वशः** । आनुपूर्वी[^३] क्रमः । येन क्रमेणानुष्ठेयानि सो ऽप्य् उच्यताम् । "जातकर्मानन्तरं चौडमौञ्जीनिबन्धनेत्यादि" । यथावद् इत्य् अत्र पदार्थविषयं कार्त्स्न्यम् उपात्तम् । क्रमस् तु पदार्थो न भवत्य् अतः पृथग् अनुपूर्वश इत्य् उपात्तम् ।


[^३]:
J :  anupūrvaḥ

- **धर्म**शब्दः कर्तव्याकर्तव्यतयोर् विधिप्रतिषेधयोर् अदृष्टार्थोस् तद्विषयायां च क्रियायां दृष्टप्रयोगः । तस्य तु किम् उभयं पदार्थ उतान्यतरत्र गौण इति नायं विचारः क्रियते । ग्रन्थान्तरे विस्तरेण कृतत्वाद् इहानुपयोगाच् च । सर्वथा तावत् "अष्टकाः कर्तव्याः" "न कलञ्जं भक्षयेत्" इत्यादाव् अष्टकाविषया कर्तव्यता प्रतीयते, कलञ्जभक्षणविषयश् च प्रतिषेधः । तद् अष्टकाख्यं कर्म धर्मस् तद्विषया वा कर्तव्यतेति फले न विशेषः । धर्मरूपोपदेशाच् च यत् तद्विपरीतम् अधर्मो ऽसाव् इत्य् अर्थात् सिध्यति । अतो धर्माधर्माव् उभाव् अपि शास्त्रस्य विषय इत्य् उक्तं भवति । तत्राष्टकाकरणं धर्मो ब्रह्महत्यादिवर्जनं च धर्मः । अष्टकानाम् अकरणम् अधर्मो ब्रह्महत्यायाश् च करणम् अधर्मः । अयं धर्माधर्मयोर् विवेकः ।

- **अर्हसीति **सामर्थ्यलक्षणया योग्यतया प्रवचनाधिकारम् आचार्यस्याहुः । यतस् त्वं समर्थो धर्मान् वक्तुम्, अतो ऽधिकृतः सन्न् अध्येष्यसे ब्रूहीति । यो यत्राधिकृतस् तत् तेन कर्तव्यम् इति सामर्थ्यगम्यं ब्रूहीत्य् अध्येषणापदम् अध्याह्रियते ॥ १.२ ॥

_उक्तम् अदृष्टार्थे व्यापारमात्रे धर्मशब्दो वर्तते । तत्र यथाष्टकादौ तस्य प्रयोग एवं चैत्यवन्दनादाव् अपीति । तत्र कतमे धर्मा अत्रोच्यन्त इति संशये धर्मविशेषप्रतिपादनार्थम् उक्तसामर्थ्योपादनार्थं_[^४]_ च "त्वम् एक इति" ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The second verse describes what the sages said to Manu, after having
approached and worshipped him.

The term ‘*bhaga*,’ ‘blessings,’ is used for *superiority, magnanimity,
fame, strength* and so forth; and ‘*bhagavān*’ is he who possesses all
this; that is (in the present context) *Manu*; hence it is he who is
addressed by the term ‘O blessed one.’

The term ‘*caste*’ is applied to the three castes, ‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’
‘*Kṣatriya*,’ and ‘*Vaiśya*’—the term ‘all’ has been added for the
purpose of including the ‘*Śūdra*’; if this was not done, then, the
question, emanating from the Great Sages (who represent only the three
higher castes), would be restricted to the three castes only.

‘*Intermediate*’ means *middle*; from the mixture of two castes there
arises another imperfect caste; those that are born out of those
imperfect unions are the ‘intermediate castes,’ born in the natural
order or the reverse; those known under the names ‘*Mūrdhāvasikta*,’
‘*Kṣattṛ*,’ ‘*Vaidehika*’ and so forth (*Vide*, Manu 10.7 *et. seq*.),
these could not be classed under the caste either of the mother or that
of the father; just as the Mule born out of the union of the Horse and
the Ass is a distinct species, it is neither the ‘horse’ nor the
‘ass’;—on this ground these would not be included under the ‘castes’;
hence they have been mentioned separately.

*Objection*—“But the offspring of ṭhe union of castes mixed in the
natural order is regarded as belonging to the caste of the mother.”

It is not so, we reply. From what is said under 10.6 as to these castes
being ‘similar,’ it is clear that they are only ‘similar’ to the caste
of the mother, and not quite the same as this latter. The functions of
these intermediate castes also are such as can be learnt only from
scriptures; they cannot be ascertained entirely from their natural
inclinations (as in the case of lower animals); and in as much as these
functions cannot be ascertained by the help of any other source of
knowledge, they fall under the term ‘Dharma,’ ‘duties,’ and as such
deserve to be expounded in the scriptures. Of the intermediate castes
born of unions in the reverse order, such duties as ‘not harming others’
and so forth are going to be described (by Manu himself under 10.63).
When they are spoken of as being ‘without any duties,’ the ‘duties’
meant are such as Observances, Fasts and so forth.

‘*Yathāvat*,’ ‘*in due form*.’—The suffix ‘*vati*’ denotes *propriety*;
the meaning being—‘in the form in which performance would be proper.’
This ‘propriety’ also includes such details as—‘this is compulsory, that
is optional,’ ‘this is primary, that is secondary,’ as also rules
relating to substance, place, time, agent and so forth.

‘*Anupūrvaśaḥ*,’ ‘*in due order*.’—‘Order’ means *sequence*; the meaning
is—‘please explain also the order in which the several duties have to be
performed.’ The order meant is such as—after the performance of the
‘Birth-rite,’ come respectively ‘Tonsure,’ ‘Initiation’ and so forth.
The phrase ‘in due form’ implies completeness in regard to
subject-matter; ‘order’ does not form part of the subject-matter, hence
the qualification ‘in due order’ has been added separately.

The word ‘*dharma*,’ ‘*duty*,’ is found to be used in reference to—(1)
the injunction of what should be done, (2) the prohibition of what
should not be done,—both these bearing upon transcendental purposes,—and
also (3) action in accordance with the said Injunctions and
Prohibitions. Whether the denotation of the term applies equally to
both, or it applies primarily to one only, and to another only
secondarily,—this we do not discuss on the present occasion; and we have
already discussed this in detail in another work (the *Smṛtiviveka*),
and it has no direct bearing on the present context. In any case, when
it is declared that the *Aṣṭakās* should be performed,’ what is clearly
understood is the *propriety of performing* in relation to the
*Aṣṭakāt*; and when it is declared that ‘the meat of the animal killed
by a poisoned arrow should not be eaten,' what is dearly understood is
the *impropriety of performing* in relation to the eating of the said
meat. Whether the *action of the Aṣṭakā* is regarded as ‘*duty*,’ or the
*propriety of performing that act*,—it does not make any difference in
the ultimate result. And when the form of ‘duty’ has been duly
expounded, that is contrary constitutes ‘*Adharma*’ (sin) follows
naturally by implication. Thus what is meant is that ‘*Dharma*,’ ‘Duty,’
as also ‘*Adharma*,’ ‘sin,’ both form the subject-matter of the
scriptural treatise: the *performance* of the ‘Aṣṭakā’ is a *Duty*, as
also is the *avoidance* of Brāhmaṇa-murder’; the *non-performance* of
Aṣṭaka’ is a *sin*, as also is the *performance* of Brāhmaṇa-murder’;
such is the distinction (between ‘Duty’ and ‘Sin’ as described in the
scriptures).

‘*Arhasi*,’ ‘*may you*’—indicates *ability* in the shape of possessing
the requisite capacity; and as such expresses the fact of the teacher
being a lit and proper person for the expounding the duties; the sense
being—‘in as much as you are fully able to expound the Duties, hence you
are a fit and proper person for that work,—ns such you are entreated by
us to explain to us the said Duties’; it follows by implication that
when a man is a fit and proper person for doing a certain act, that act
should be done by him. The term of entreaty ‘do please explain to us’ is
supplied from without.—(2)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘O blessed one,’ *bhagavan*—The title *bhagavān* means ‘one who
possesses *Bhaga*.’ What ‘*bhaga*’ stands for is thus described in the
Viṣṇupurāṇa quoted by Kullūka—‘*Bhaga* is the name for the following
six—(1) full sovereignty, (2) strength, (3) fame, (4) glory, (5)
knowledge and (6) freedom from passion.’

‘Intermediate castes,’ *antaraprabhavān*—This refers to the ‘mixed
castes’ described under Discourse 10.

P. 3, l. 24—For *manuḥ* J reads *manoḥ* which would be construed with
*sambodhanam*.

P. 3, l. 25—for *jñātiṣu* (l. 25) J and Mand. lightly read *jātiṣu*.

P. 4, l. 3—Those castes being similar &c. *sadṛśāneva tānāhu*:—This is
Manu, 10. 6, where Medhātithi says—*te sadṛśā eva jñeyāḥ,
natajjātīyāḥ......tatsadṛśagrahaṇāt mātṛta utkṛṣṭāḥ pitṛto
nikṛṣṭāḥ*—‘They should he regarded as *equal to*, not of the same caste
as, their fathers; what is meant is that they are superior to the
mother, but inferior to the father.’

P. 4, l. 14—‘In another work,’ *granthāntare*—Does this refer to the
author’s *Smṛtiviveka* from which he has quoted in his comments on 2. 6
below?

Medhātithi does not attach much importance to the account of creation
here provided. In more than one place he says that the whole of Adhyāya
I is ‘mere *Arthavāda*.’ In his comments on verse 5, for instance, he
says that the process described is in some places in accordance with the
account found in the Purāṇas, and in others, in accordance with the
tenets of the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy; and that no attention need
be paid to this, as it has no direct bearing upon *Dharma*. Again under
verse 9, he says that as this subject does not form the real
subject-matter of the treatise, no attention need he paid to what the
author says on it.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

002	'Deign, divine one, to declare to us precisely and in due order the sacred laws of each of the (four chief) castes (varna) and of the intermediate ones.
</details>
