+++
title = "003 त्वम् एको"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thou alone, O Lord, art conversant with what ought to be done, which forms the true import of this entire Veda—which is eternal, inconceivable and not directly cognisable.—(3)


“As a matter of fact, Vidhi is something in the form of what should be done, expressed by the injunctive and such other verbal expressions; and this, in all cases, must be directly expressed by actual words; under the circumstances, what do you mean by saying that there are two kinds of injunction,—that the term ‘one should offer’ denotes something to be done, and the procedure of the offering is indicated by implication in the manner described above?”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**त्वम्** एव **एको** ऽसहायो ऽद्वितीयः । **सर्वस्य विधानस्य कार्यतत्वार्थवित्** । **विधानं** शास्त्रं विधीयन्ते ऽनेन कर्माणीति । तस्य **स्वयंभुवो** नित्यस्याकृतकस्यापौरुषेयस्य वेदाख्यस्य । **सर्वस्य** प्रत्यक्षाक्षरस्यानुमेयाक्षरस्य च । "अग्निहोत्रं जुहुयाद् अयं[^५] सहस्रमानव इत्य् एतया[^६] आहवनीयम् उपतिष्ठते" इति प्रत्यक्ष एव वेदो ऽयं होमं विधत्ते । एतयेति च तृतीयया प्रत्यक्षस्यैव मन्त्रस्याहवनीयोपस्थाने विनियोगः । "अष्टकाः कर्तव्याः" इत्य् अत्र तु स्मृत्यानुमीयते वेदः । "बर्हिर् वेदसदनं दामि" इति लिङ्गाद् अनेन बर्हिर् लुनातीति श्रुतेर् अनुमानम् । अयं हि मन्त्रो दर्शपूर्णमासप्रकरणे पठितो बर्हिर् लवनं च तत्राम्नातम् । अनेन मन्त्रेण लुनीयात् इत्य् एतत् तु नास्ति । मन्त्रः पुना रूपाद् बर्हिर्लवनप्रकाशनसमर्थः । प्रकरणात् सामान्यतः सिद्धो दर्शपूर्णमाससंबन्धः । स्वसामर्थ्येन तु बर्हिर्लवने प्रयुज्यते । एष ह्य् अत्र प्रतीतिः । प्रकरणाद् दर्शपूर्णमासाव् अनेन मन्त्रेण कुर्यात् । कथम् इति । यथा शक्नुयाद् इत्य् अनुक्तापि शक्तिः सर्वत्र सहकारिणी । किं च शक्नोति मन्त्रः कर्तुं । बर्हिर्लवनं प्रकाशयितुम् । ततः प्रकरणात् स्वसामर्थ्याच् चानेन मन्त्रेण "बर्हिर् लुनाति" इति बुद्धौ शब्द आगच्छति । सविकल्पकविज्ञानैः पूर्वं शब्दः प्रतीयत इति । स बुद्धिस्थः शब्दो ऽनुमेयो वेद उच्यते । वेदत्वं च तस्य दर्शपूर्णमासवाक्यमन्त्रवाक्याभ्यां श्रुत्यन्तराभ्यां स्वसामर्थ्येनोत्थापितत्वाद् इति कुमारिलपक्षः ।


[^६]:
     M oits:. āhavanīyasya ... mantrasya; G 1st ed. has the same omission, but corrected in the 2nd ed.


[^५]:
     M: abhayaṃ

- अथ वा विधिर् **विधानम्** अनुष्ठानं प्रयोजनसंपत्तिः । तस्य **स्वयंभुवो** नित्यस्यानादिपरंपरायातस्य, स्वयंभुवा वेदेन वा प्रतिपाद्यस्य, **सर्वस्य** श्रूयमाणाक्षरप्रतिपाद्यस्य प्रतिपन्नार्थसामर्थ्यगम्यस्य च । द्विविधो हि वैदिको विधिः । कश्चित् साक्षाच् छब्दप्रतिपाद्य्ः । यथा "सौरं चरुं निर्वपेत् ब्रह्मवर्चसकामः" इति सौर्ये चरौ[^७] ब्रह्मवर्चसकामो ऽधिक्रियते । तस्य चरोर् ब्रह्मवर्चसं साधयत इयम् इतिकर्तव्यता आग्नेयवद् इत्य् अवगम्यते[^८] । उभयत्रापि चेयं प्रतीतिः शब्दावगममूलत्वात्[^९] शब्द एव । उभाव् अपि शब्दाद् अभिधानतः प्रतीयते, तथा अभिधेयप्रतिपत्तितः । विशेषस् तु व्यवधानादिकृतो न शब्दतां विहन्ति । यथा वापीथम् उदकं हस्तेनाभिहतं प्रदेशान्तरम् अभिहन्ति तद् अपि हतसंयोगेनैवाभिहतं भवति न तु साक्षात् । शर्कराणां रेचककर्मण्याद्यप्रयत्नकृता एवोत्प्लुत्योत्प्लुत्य पाताः । तादृशम् एततत् । वैकृते कर्मणि विशिष्टेतिकर्तव्यतासंबन्धः । एवं "विश्वजिता यजेत" इत्य् उत्पत्तिर् नाधिकारशून्यास्तीति स्वर्गकाम इत्य् अधिकारावगतिः प्रतिपन्नार्थसामर्थ्यगम्या । अतो[^१०] वैरूप्यं विधानस्य सर्वस्येतिपदं सर्वस्य तात्पर्यम् एवं रूपं, वेदमूलाः स्मृतय इति ज्ञापयितुम् । द्वितीये चैतद् दर्शयिष्यामः ।


[^१०]:
     M G (1st ed.): anyato


[^९]:
     Here numerous variants: M, G (1st ed.): -mūlatvāt | śabdodayo 'pi śabdābhidhānataḥ; G (2nd ed.) : -mūlatvāt | ubhāv api śabdādayo 'pi śabdād abhidhānataḥ (ca) pratīyate; 


[^८]:
     M: avagamayati


[^७]:
     J: sauryacarau

- <u>ननु</u> लिङ्गादिप्रतिपाद्यो ऽर्थः कर्तव्यतारूपो विधिः । स च सर्वत्र प्रत्यक्षशब्दप्रतिपाद्य एव । तत्र किम् उच्यते द्विविधो हि वैदिको विधिर् इति । निर्वपेद् इति कर्तव्यतावगम्यते । इतिकर्तव्यतार्थसामर्थ्यगम्या उक्तेन प्रकारेण ।

- <u>नैष दोषः</u> । निर्वपेद् यजेतेति न केवले धात्वर्थविषयत्वे ऽवगते परिपूर्णा कर्तव्यता भवति । यावद् अंशान्तराण्य् अधिकारेतिकर्तव्यताप्रयोगरूपाणि नावगतानि । एतैर् अंशैर् विततरूपो विधिः प्रतीयते । अतो ऽंशरूपाण्य् अपि विधिशब्दाभिलप्यतया न विरुद्धानि ।

- एतद् एवाह । **अचिन्त्यस्येति** । अप्रत्यक्षस्येत्य् अर्थः । प्रत्यक्षं ह्य् अनुभूयत इत्य् उच्यते, न चिन्त्यते इति, न स्मर्यत इति । **अप्रमेयस्य** कल्प्यस्य प्रायशः स्मृतिवाक्यमूलस्य । न हि प्रत्यक्षेण प्रमीयते । अतो ऽप्रेमेयस्येत्य् उच्यते । अथ वाप्रमेयस्येयत्तया परिमातुम् अशक्यस्यातिमहत्त्वात् । अनेकशाखाभेदभिन्नो वेदो न शक्यते सर्वैः प्रमातुम् । अत एवाचिन्त्यस्य । यद् अतिबहु तद् दुर्ग्रहत्वाद् अचिन्त्यम् इत्य् उच्यते । यथा च लोके वक्तारो भवन्ति, "अन्येषां का गतिः, चिन्तयितुम् अप्य् एतन् न युज्यते" इति । मनः किल सर्वविषयम् । अयं चातिमहत्त्वात् तस्यापि न विषय इति । पदद्वयेन बाह्यान्तःकरणविषयतया महत्त्वस्य ख्यापनेनाचार्यः प्रोत्साह्यते । त्वयैव केवलेनैवंविधो वेद आगमितो ऽतस् तस्य यः कार्यरूपस् तत्त्वार्थस् तम् वेत्सि जानीषे । 

- कार्यम् अनुष्ठेयम् उच्यते । यत्र पुरुषो ऽनुष्ठातृत्वेन विनियुज्यते- इदं त्वया कर्तव्यम्, इदं त्वया न कर्तव्यम् इत्य्; अग्निहोत्रादि कर्तव्यम् कलञ्जभक्षणादि न कर्तव्यम् । प्रतिषेधो ऽप्य् अनुष्ठानम् एव । यद् ब्राह्मणवधस्याननुष्ठानं तद् एव प्रतिषेधस्यानुष्ठानम् । प्रवृत्तिश् च क्रिया निवृत्तिश् च क्रियेति । न हि परिस्पन्दनमानसाधनसाध्यम् एवानुष्ठानम् उच्यते । किं तर्हि । प्राप्ते तद्रूपे तन्निवृत्तिर् अपि । यथा "हितसेवी चिरायुः" इति । यः प्राप्ते काले भुङ्के ऽप्राप्ते न भुङ्के । अभोजनम् अपि हितम् एव । 

- अथ वा कार्यशब्दः प्रदर्शनार्थो विधेः प्रतिषेधस्य च । एतावद् एव[^११] वेदस्य तत्त्वरूपः पारमार्थिको ऽर्थः । यस् त्व्[^१२] इतिवृत्तसंवर्णनरूपः "सो ऽरोदीद् यद् अरोदीत् तद् रुद्रस्य रुद्रत्वम्" (त्स् १.५.१.१; निर् १०.५) इति स न तत्त्वार्थः, विध्यन्तरेणैकवाक्यत्वात् प्रशंसापरत्वेन स्वार्थनिष्ठत्वाभावात् । अस्ति ह्य् अत्र विध्यन्तरम् "तस्माद् बर्हिषि रजतं न देयम्" (त्स् १.५.१.२) इति । "सो ऽरोदीत्" इत्यादीनि "पुरास्य संवत्सराद् गृहे रोदनं भवति" इत्यन्तानि (स् १.५.१.१–२) तद् एकवाक्यतापन्नानि बर्हिषि रजतदाननिन्दया तत् प्रतिषेधं स्तुवन्ति । तद् उक्तं "साध्ये ऽर्थे वेदः प्रमाणं, न सिद्धरूपे" । अर्थवादानां हि सिद्धरूपो ऽर्थः । न हि तदर्थस्य कर्तव्यता प्रतीयते । विध्युपदेशपरत्वं च प्रतीयते । यदि च स्वार्थपरा अपि स्युस् तदा विधिपरत्वं व्याहन्येत । ततश् च प्रतीयमानैकवाक्यता बाध्येत । न च संभवत्य् एकवाक्यत्वे वाक्यभेदो न्याय्यः । न च साध्यस्य सिद्धार्थपरत्वेनैकवाक्यता घटते । तथा हि न किंचिद् वेदेनोपदिश्यते कर्तव्यम् । अतश् चाप्रमाणम् एव वेदः स्यात् । विध्यर्थता चावगम्यमाना लिङादीनां त्यक्ता स्यात् । तस्मात् कार्यरूपो[^१३] वेदस्य तत्त्वार्थ इति मनुर् भगवान् आह । जैमिनिनाप्य् उक्तं कार्ये ऽर्थे वेदः प्रमाणम् "चोदनालक्षणो ऽर्थो धर्मः" (प्म्स् १.१.२) इति । 


[^१३]:
     G: -rūpī


[^१२]:
     G: 'rtho vastu | iti


[^११]:
     M: etāvān vedasya

- अतश् च निरवशेषपदार्थपरिज्ञानातिशययोगाद् धर्मप्रवचनसामर्थ्यं सिद्धवद् उपादाय, **प्रभो** इत्य् आमन्त्रणम् । "हे प्रभो धर्माभिधानशक्त त्वम् अनुब्रूहि धर्मान्" इति । एवम् अनया त्रिश्लोक्या धर्मान् पृष्ट उत्तरेण श्लोकेन प्रतिजज्ञे ॥ १.३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

At this stage the following question arises—“It has been said that the
term ‘Duty’ is used in the sense of only that activity which tends to
accomplish a transcendental purpose; and such activity may consist in
the *performing of the Aṣṭakā*, as also in *bowing to Caityas* and such
other acts (prescribed in the heterodox scriptures); and what sort of
Duties is going to be expounded in the present Treatise?”

In answer to this we have the third verse, which serves the purpose of
pointing out what Duties are going to be expounded and also of further
indicating the aptitude of Manu already mentioned.

‘*Thou alone*’—without any one to help you; without a second.

‘*Sarvasya vidhānasya kāryatattvārthavit*.’—The term ‘*Vidhāna*,’
meaning that by which acts are enjoined, stands for the *scripture*;—it
is called ‘*svayambhu*’ in the sense that it is eternal, not a product,
not the work of man; and its name is ‘*Veda*’;—‘*entire*’ *i.e*.,
including the text which is directly found in the Veda, as also that the
exact words of which are only inferred; for instance, (*a*) in the
text—‘*one should perform the Agnihotra, it pertains to thousand
men*,—by means of this verse one should worship the Āhavanīya’—we have
the Veda directly enjoining what is to be done; the term ‘by means of
this,’ ending as it docs with the instrumental case-termination, serving
to point out the employment of the mantra-text directly quoted;—(*b*)
while in the case of the injunction ‘the Aṣṭakās should be performed,’
which is found in the *Smṛti, we* infer, on the strength of this
*Smṛti*, the corresponding Veda text;—similarly, when we read the
Mantra-text, ‘I am chopping grass, the seat of the Gods,’ we at once
infer, on the basis of the indicative power of the words of that text,
the Vedic injunction that ‘the said text is to be employed in the
chopping of grass this Mantra is found in that section of the Veda which
deals with the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa sacrifice*, and the *chopping of grass*
is laid down as to be done in course of that sacrifice; but there is no
such direct injunction as that ‘the chopping should be done with such
and such a Mantra and the above-mentioned Mantra-text is found to be
capable, by its very form, of indicating the *chopping of grass*; while
as regards its being connected in a general way, with the sacrifice,
this follows the fact of its occurring in the same ‘context’ as the
injunction of that sacrifice; and it is by virtue of its own indicative
force that it comes to be employed in the chopping of grass. The idea
arising in the mind of the student (on noticing the above facts) is as
follows:—‘From the context it follows that the Mantra-text in question
should be used in the performance of the *pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices;—how is
this to be done?—well, the natural answer is that it is to be used in
the manner in which it is capable of being used; the capacity of a
thing, even though not directly mentioned, always help., in determining
its use;—what then is the Mantra-text capable of doing?—it is capable of
indicating the *chopping of grass*;—hence from the context, and from the
capability of the Mantra itself, it follows that it should be employed
in the chopping of grass’;—as soon as this idea has been arrived at, the
corresponding words, ‘by this Mantra the chopping of grass should be
done,’ present themselves to the mind; because as a matter of fact,
every concrete conception is preceded by the corresponding verbal
expression. The said verbal expression, thus presenting itself to the
mind, is called the ‘*inferred* Vedic text.’ The Text thus inferred is
regarded as ‘Veda,’ by virtue of the fact that it owes its existence to
the force of two other Vedic texts—*viz*., the text laying down the
*Darśapūrṇamāsa* and the *Mantra-text* referred to above. Such is the
opinion of Kumārila.

Or, the term ‘*vidhāna*’ may be taken as equivalent to ‘*vidki*’,
meaning actual *operation*, the *accomplishment of purpose*; this is
called ‘*svayambhu*’ in the sense that it is *eternal, i.e*., handed
down by beginningless tradition,—or that *it is prescribed in the
eternal Veda*;—‘entire’—*i.e*., what is prescribed in the directly
available verbal texts, and what is only implied by the force of what is
directly expressed by the words of the texts. The Vedic injunction is of
two kinds:—(a) There is one kind of injunction which is directly
expressed by the words; *e.g*., ‘desirous of Brahmic glory, one should
offer the *Saurya-Caru*’; here what is expressed is that one who desires
Brahmic glory is the ñt and proper person to offer the *Saurya-Caru*;
and when one proceeds to secure Brahmic glory by means of the said
offering, he learns that the procedure of the offering is analogous to
the *Āgneya* offering (which is the archetype of all *Caru-offerings*).
In both these cases the idea got at, being derived from the words of the
texts, is regarded as ‘derived directly from words;’ though the former
is derived directly from the words and the latter from what is
‘expressed by the worlds,’ yet, this difference, due to the removal of
the latter by one step, does not deprive it of the character of ‘being
derived from words.’ For instance, when the water in the pool is struck
by the hand, and it in its turn strikes against some other place; and
yet this latter place is regarded as being struck by the hand, though
not directly; similarly when pieces of rubber are thrown down, they rise
and fall, and all the subsequent acts of rising and falling are the
indirect effects of 'the first downward impulse imparted to them.
Exactly analogous is the case of the injunctions in question: Every
ectypal sacrifice is related to a particular form of procedure (borrowed
from its archetype). Similarly when we meet with the injunction ‘one
should perform the *Viśvajit* sacrifice,’ we argue that no injunction is
possible except in reference to a fit and proper person capable of (and
having a motive for) performing it, and hence come to the conclusion
that the person so capable is one who desires Heaven; this idea being
thus implied by the force of what is directly expressed by the words of
the text. It is in view of this two-fold character of injunctions (and
enjoined acts) that we have the term ‘entire.’ In fact the purpose of
adding the epithet ‘entire’ is to indicate that *Smṛtis* have their
source in the Veda. This we shall explain under Discourse II.

An objection is raised:—

> “As a matter of fact, *Vidhi* is something in the form of what should
> be done, expressed by the injunctive and such other verbal
> expressions; and this, in all cases, must be directly expressed by
> actual words; under the circumstances, what do you mean by saying that
> there are two kinds of injunction,—that the term ‘one should offer’
> denotes something to be done, and the procedure of the offering is
> indicated by implication in the manner described above?”

There is no force in this objection. As a matter of fact, in the case of
the injunctive words ‘*nirvapet*,’ ‘should offer,’ ‘*yajeta*,’ ‘should
sacrifice’ and the like, even though what is expressed by the verbal
root itself may be comprehended, the full conception of *what is to he
done* is not obtained until we have comprehended the other factors,—such
as the character of the person fit for the performance, the procedure to
be adopted, and the actual details of the act to be performed; it is
only as equipped with all these factors that the Injunction becomes
comprehended in its complete form. In view of this fact, there is
nothing incongruous in regarding the said factors also as denoted by the
Injunctive word.

This is what the text means by the epithet ‘*achintya*,’
‘*inconceivable*’—which means ‘not directly perceptible.’ What is
directly perceived is said to be ‘apprehended,’ and not ‘conceived,’ or
‘remembred’ \[so that if the Veda were something directly perceived, the
epithet ‘inconceivable’ would have no force; things like the Veda can
only be *conceived of*, and the Veda isnot even that\].

‘*Not directly cognisable*;’—*i.e*., that which has got to be assumed or
inferred, as forming the source of several assertions made in the
*Smṛti*;as a matter of fact, such Vedic texts are not *perceived*, hence
it is called ‘not directly cognisable.’—Or ‘*not directly cognisable*’
may he taken in the sense of *incapable of having its extent exactly
defined*, by reason of its being very extensive; the Veda being divided
into several rescensions, cannot be exactly defined by all persons; and
on this account also it may be called ‘*inconceivable*;’ even in
ordinary parlance, people are found to say—‘what to say of others; this
cannot be even conceived of.’ The mind can conceive of all things; but
the Veda is so extensive that it cannot be conceived of even by the
mind. Thus the two epithets (‘inconceivable’ and ‘not directly
cognisable’) serve to indicate that the Veda is beyond the reach of the
internal as well as the external organs of perception; *i.e*., it is
very extensive; and this mention of the extensiveness of the Veda serves
as an inducement to the Teacher; the meaning being—‘it is you alone who
have learnt the Veda which is so extensive, hence you alone are
*conversant with what ought to be done, which forms the true import of
the said Veda*.’

The term ‘*Kārya*,’ ‘what ought to be done,’ stands for *the act to be
performed*; in reference to which the man is prompted to be the
*performer*, (in such terms as)—‘this should be done by you,’ ‘this
should not be done by you,’ ‘the Agnihotra should be performed’ ‘the
eating of the flesh of an animal killed by a poisoned arrow should not
be done.’ *Avoidance* also is a kind of ‘acting;’ *e.g*., the ‘non-doing
of Brāhmaṇa-murder’ constitutes the ‘performance’ or ‘acting’ of the
*avoidance* (of Brāhmaṇa-murder). *Activity* is ‘acting;’ so is also
‘desisting from activity;’ and the name ‘acting’ is not restricted to
only that which is accomplished by means of instruments and agents set
in motion; in fact, when such ‘acting’ is possible, if one desists from
it, this *desisting* also is ‘acting.’ For instance, when it is asserted
that ‘the man who takes wholesome food lives long,’ what is meant is
that the man who takes his food at the proper time, and who *does not
eat* at the improper time; as *desisting from eating* is also
‘wholesome.’

Or, the word ‘*Kārya*’ may be taken as indicating the Injunction and the
Prohibition; as these alone form the essence of the Veda; the other
parts of it, which are merely descriptive of certain happenings,—such
passages for instance as ‘he wept, and because he wept, he became known
as *Rudra*,’—are not *true*; they are not meant to be taken in their
literal sense, they are meant to be construed along with an injunctive
passage and serving the purpose of commending what has been laid down in
that injunctive passage. For instance, the descriptive passage just
quoted—beginning with ‘he wept’ and, ending with ‘there is weeping in
his house within a year’—is to be construed with the injunctive
passage—‘Therefore silver should not be placed on the grass;’ and being
deprecatory of the *placing of silver*, it serves the purpose of
commending the prohibition of that placing of silver. This is what is
meant by the dictum—‘the Veda is an authoritative source of knowledge in
regard to *what has to be accomplished*, and not *what is already
accomplished* and what is mentioned in the *Arthavāda* or Descriptive
Passages is what is already accomplished; and what is already
accomplished cannot be cognised as *something to be done*; what however
is cognised is that the description is supplementary to some injunction;
if then it were taken to be true in its own literal sense, it could not
be supplementary to any injunction; and this would militate against the
syntactical connection between the two passages—descriptive and
injunctive; and so long as two passages can be taken as syntactically
connected and constituting a single compound sentence, it is not right
to take them as two distinct sentences. \[The reverse process of taking
the injunction as supplementary to the description would not be right;
for\] as a matter of fact, what is yet to be accomplished could not be
subservient to what is already accomplished; specially because, if this
were so (and the in junction itself were not literally true), then the
Veda would contain no injunction of anything at all; and it would
thereby cease to be an authoritative source of knowledge. This would
involve the further incongruity, that we would have to deny the
well-recognised fact of the injunctive and other words denoting
*injunction*. It is with a view to all this that the revered Manu has
declared ‘something to be done’ as the ‘essence’ of the Veda. Jaimini
also in the *Pūrvamīmānsā-Sūtra* (1.1.2)—‘Duty is that desirable tiling
which is prescribed by the Vedic injunction’—has distinctly declared
that the Veda is an authoritative source of knowledge in regard to *what
is to be done*.

The term of address ‘Lord’ has been used on the understanding that the
personage addressed is well-known to be possessed of the capacity to
expound duty,—such capacity being due to his being endowed with a high
degree of knowledge of all things. The meaning thus is—‘O Lord, may you,
who are fully able to expound Duty, explain the Duties to us.’

Being thus questioned by means of the first three verses, he promised,
in the following verse, what he was asked to do. (3)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vidhānasya svayambhuvaḥ*’—Buhler has translated this phrase to mean
‘the ordinance of the self-existent’,—evidently taking ‘*Svayambhuvaḥ*’
as standing for God. This, however, is incompatible with the
interpretation of all the commentators, according to whom
‘*Svayambhuvaḥ*’ is in apposition to ’*Vidhānasya*’,—the phrase meaning
the ‘self-existent ordinance’, ‘the Eternal Law’ (the Veda). Burnell is
more to the point when he renders it as ‘self-existent system.’
Medhātithi (p. 5) has suggested another explanation—‘activity handed
down by immemorial tradition.’

‘*Aprameyasya*’—Though other commentatoss are satisfied with rendering
this epithet as meaning ‘unfathomable,’ Medhātithi imparts to it a
special significance by explaining it as ‘not directly knowable, but to
be inferred, as the foundation of the Smṛti.’

‘*Kāryatattvārtha*’—‘the purport and nature of the soul’ (Kullū.)—‘the
true purport’ (Medhātithi, Govinda and Nandana)

It is noteworthy that Medhātithi has supplied, under verse 11 below, a
totally different explanation of this verse.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

003	'For thou, O Lord, alone knowest the purport, (i.e.) the rites, and the knowledge of the soul, (taught) in this whole ordinance of the Self-existent (Svayambhu), which is unknowable and unfathomable.'
</details>
