+++
title = "004 स तैः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Being thus questioned by the high-souled Great Sages, he, possessed op illimitable vigour, received them with reverence, and with proper courtesy answered them—‘listen.’—(4)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स** मनुर् **अमितौजास्** **तैर्** महर्षिभिर् **महात्मभिः** **पृष्टस्** **तथा तान् प्रत्युवाच । श्रूयताम् इति** । **तथा** तेन प्रागुक्तेन प्रकारेण । पृच्छ्यमानवस्तु प्रश्नविधिश् च प्रकारवचने तथाशब्दे ऽन्तर्भूतः । तेनायम् अर्थस् तथा पृष्टस् **तान्** धर्मान् पृष्टः **प्रत्युवाच** । अथ वा **तथेति** प्रकारमात्रम् आचष्टे । **पृष्ट** इति पूर्वश्लोकात् पृच्छ्यमानविशेषो बुद्धौ विपरिवर्तत एव । तेन यत् पृष्टस् तत् प्रत्युवाच **श्रूयताम् इति** प्रश्नप्रतिवचनयोर् एककर्मता सिद्धा भवति । तदा च **तथा**शब्दः श्लोकपूरणार्थः । आद्ये तु व्याख्याने **तथा**शब्दोपात्तैव प्रश्नप्रतिवचनयोर् एककर्मता । **सम्यक्**शब्दः प्रतिवचनविशेषणम् । सम्यक् प्रत्युवाच । प्रसन्नेन मनसा न क्रोधादियोगेन । **अमितौजा** अक्षीणवाग्विभवः- अमितम् अनन्तम् ओजो वीर्यम् अभिधानसामर्थ्यम् अस्येति । महात्मतया महर्षीणां धर्मप्रष्ट्रत्वं महर्षित्वं चाविरुद्धम् इत्य् आह- **महर्षीन्** इति । "परार्थकारी सततं महात्मा" इत्य् उच्यते । तेन यद्य् अपि स्वयं विदांसो ऽधिगतयाथातथ्याः, अन्यथा महर्षित्वानुपपत्तेः, तथापि पराथम् अपृच्छन् । मनुः प्रख्याततरप्रमाणभावः । एतेन यद् उच्यते तल् लोकेनाद्रियते । प्रत्ययतो ऽयं समुपास्यते ऽतः शास्त्रावतारार्थम् उपाध्यायीकुर्मः । अस्माभिश् च पृच्छ्यमानः प्रमाणतरीकरिष्यते जनेनेति । अत एव्**आर्च्य तान्** **सर्वान्** इत्य् अर्चनम् अविरुद्धम् । अन्यथा शिष्यस्योपाध्यायात् कीदृश्य् अर्चेति । अर्चयतेर् आङ्पूर्वस्य ल्यबन्तस्य रूपम् आर्च्येति । पाठान्त्रम् "अर्चयित्वा तान्" इति ।

- <u>अत्र</u> यद् उच्यते । यदि मनुनायं ग्रन्थः कृतः परापदेशो न युक्तः "स तैः पृष्टः प्रत्युवाच" इति । "अहं पृष्टः प्रत्यब्रवम्" इति न्याय्यम् । अथान्यतर एव ग्रन्थस्य कर्ता मानवव्यपदेशः कथम् इति । 

- <u>तद् अचोद्यं</u> । प्रायेण ग्रन्थकाराः स्वमतं परापदेशेन ब्रुवते- "अत्राह," "अत्र परिहरन्ति" इति नैवम् "अहं तैः पृष्टः" इति । यो यः पूर्वतरः स स प्रमाणतरो लोकेनाभ्युपगम्यते[^१४]- "तत् प्रमाणं बादरायणस्य" इति । अथ वा भृगुप्रोक्ता संहितेयं । मानवी तु स्मृतिरूपनिबद्धेति मानवव्यपदेशः । **प्रत्युवाच तान् महर्षीन्** । किं तत् । यद् अहं पृष्टस् तत् **श्रूयताम् इति** ॥ १.४ ॥


[^१४]:
     G 1st ed.: loke na tv eva nābhyupagamyate
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He*’—Manu—‘*possessed of illimitable being thus questioned by the
high-souled Great Sages, answered them*—“*Listen*.”’

‘*Thus*’—in the aforesaid manner; the word ‘thus’ which denotes
*method*, includes the *matter* as well as the *manner* of the question;
hence ‘*thus questioned*’ means ‘thus questioned, *i.e*., questioned
about Duties—he answered.’

Or, the word ‘thus’ may be taken as denoting *manner* only. As a matter
of fact, however the word ‘*questioned*’ already brings to the mind the
details (matter as well as manner) of what has been questioned about;
hence the meaning is—‘what he was questioned about, that he answered
thus the *question* and the *answer* come to have the same objective.

Under this explanation the word ‘thus’ become super fluous, and only
serves the purpose of filling the gap in the metre. Under the former
explanation however, the word ‘thus’ itself serves the purpose of
showing that the ‘questioning’ and the ‘answering’ have both the same
objective.

The word ‘*Samyak*,’ ‘*with proper courtesy*,’qualifies the *answering*:
‘he answered with proper courtesy’—*i.e., gladly*, not with anger or any
other form of displeasure.

‘*Possessed of inimitable vigour*’—with undiminished power of speech; he
whose vigour,’ power, capacity of exposition, is ‘illimitable,’
infinite.

The epithet ‘*high-souled*,’ serves to show that there is no
incompatibility in the persons being ‘Great Sages,’ and at the same time
‘questioners’ (as if they themselves did not know what they were asking
about); hence it is said ‘he answered the Great Sages.’ It is the
philanthropic person that is called ‘high-souled,’ hence the meaning is
that though they themselves knew all about Duties,—otherwise they would
not be ‘Great Sages,’—yet they questioned Manu for the benefit of other
people; the idea in their minds being as follows—‘Manu is a Sage whose
authoritative character is better known,—what he says is always
respected by people,—he is always approached with trust and
confidence,—hence for the expounding of the treatise, we shall make him
our Teacher’,—and when he is questioned by us, he will be regarded by
the people as still more trustworthy.’

It is this explanation that justifies the statement in the text
regarding Manu having ‘*received them with reverence*.’ If it were not
as we have explained, what would be the meaning of the ‘reverence’ shown
by the Teacher to the Pupil? The word of the text which means ‘having
received with reverence’ must be explained as a participle formed of the
root ‘*arc*’ (to worship) with the prefix ‘*ā*’ and the participial
affix ‘*lyap*’ \[as without the prefix, the form would be
‘*arcayitvā*’\]. Another reading (which removes the difficulty) is
‘*tān*.’

In connection with the present verse, the following question has been
raised—“If the whole of this Treatise has been composed by Manu himself,
it is not right to attribute it to another person, as is done in the
statement—‘being questioned by them, *he* answered’; the proper form
would have been—‘being questioned by them, I answered.’ If, on the other
hand, someone else is the author of the Treatise, then why should it be
called ‘*Mānava*’ (of Manu)?”

There is no force in this objection. In the first place, it is a well
known fact that in most cases the authors of Treatises state their own
views as if emanating from other persons,—making use of such expressions
as—‘in this connection *they say*’ or ‘*they* meet this argument thus,’
and so forth; and the form ‘being questioned by them *I* answered’ would
not be in keeping with such usage; the reason underlying this fact is
that the older the person the more authoritative he is regarded to be by
the people; it is for this reason that we find Jaimini (1.1.5) stating
his own view as emanating from ‘Bādarāyaṇa.’

Or (another explanation is that) the Treatise is a compilation made and
related by Bhṛgu; and since the original *Smṛti* \[which is, in the
present Treatise related by Bhṛgu\] was compiled (from teachings
received directly from Prajāpati) by Manu,—it is styled ‘*Manava*’ (of
Manu).

He answered the great sages;—what was the answer?—‘Listen to what I have
been questioned about.’ (4).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

The injunctions and prohibitions in the Institute are the work of
Prajāpati himself;—He taught them to Manu, who composed the ‘ordinance’,
and taught it to the sages, among whom was Bhṛgu, who was commissioned
to relate it to the sages; and the ‘ordinance’ in its present form is
what was related by Bhṛgu to the sages at a later time —*Vide* [Bhāṣya
on
1.1]
and l.56.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

004	He, whose power is measureless, being thus asked by the high-minded great sages, duly honoured them, and answered, 'Listen!'
</details>
