+++
title = "005 आसीद् इदम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This (World) was in existence in the form, as it were, of dense Darkness,—unperceived, undifferentiated, incogitable, (hence) incognizable; as it was wholly merged in deep sleep.—(5).


“Where we began and whereto we are carried! Manu was asked to expound the duties laid down in the scriptures, and he promised to expound them; under the circumstances, the description of the world in its undifferentiated state (with which the present verse begins) is wholly irrelevant and purposeless. In fact it becomes a true case of the well-known proverb —‘ Being questioned about mangoes, he describes the Kovidāra tree.’ Further, there is no authority in support of what is here described; nor is any useful purpose served by it. So the whole of this First Discourse need not be studied at all.”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>क्व अस्ताः</u> क्व निपतिताः । शास्त्रोक्तनिपतितधर्मान् पृष्टस् तान् एव वक्तव्यतया प्रतिज्ञाय जगतो ऽव्याकृतावस्थावर्णनम् अप्रकृतम् अपुरुषार्थं च । सो ऽयं सत्यो जनप्रवादः "आम्रान् पृष्टः कोविदारान् आचष्टे" इति । न चास्मिन् वस्तुनि प्रमाणं न च प्रयोजनम् इत्य् अतः सर्व एवायम् अध्यायो नाध्येतव्यः । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । शास्त्रस्य महाप्रयोजत्वम् अनेन सर्वेण प्रतिपाद्यते । ब्रह्माद्याः स्थावरपर्यन्ताः संसारगतयो धर्माधर्मनिमित्ता अत्र प्रतिपाद्यन्ते । 

- तमसा बहुरूपेण वेष्टिताः कर्महेतुना" (म्ध् १.४९) इति । 

वक्ष्यति च- 

- एता दृष्ट्वा तु जीवस्य गतीः स्वेनैव चेतसा ।

- धर्मतो ऽधर्मतश् चैव धर्मे दध्यात् सदा मनः ॥ इति । (म्ध् १२.२३)

ततश् च निरतिशयैश्वर्यहेतुर् धर्मस् तद्विपरीतश् चाधर्मस् तद्रूपपरिज्ञानार्थम् इदं शास्त्रं महाप्रयोजनम् अध्येतव्यम् इत्य् अध्यायतात्पर्यम् । सूत्रं त्व् अत्र मन्त्रार्थवादाः सामान्यतो दृष्टं च । तथा च मन्त्रः । 

- तम आसीत् तमसा गूऌहम् अग्रे ऽप्रकेतम् सलिलं सर्वम् आ इदम् ।

- तुच्छेनाभ्वपिहितं यदासीत् तपसस्[^१५] तन् महिनाजयतैकम् ॥ (र्व् १०.१२९.३) 


[^१५]:
     M G: tamasas

चन्द्रार्काग्न्यादिषु बाह्याध्यात्मिकेषु महाप्रलये प्रकाशकेषु नष्टेषु तम एव केवलम् आसीत् । तद् अपि तमः स्थूलरूपतमसा गूढं संवृत्तम् । न हि तदानीं कश्चिद् अपि ज्ञातास्ति । अतो ज्ञातुर् अभावान् न कस्यचित् ज्ञानम् अस्तीति तमसा गूढम् उच्यते । अग्ने भूतसृष्टेः प्राक् अप्रकेतम् अज्ञातं सर्वं आः आसीत् । इदं सलिलं सरणधर्मकम् क्रियावत् यत् किंचिच् चेष्टावत् तत् सर्वं निश्चेष्टम् आसीत् । तुच्छेन सूक्ष्मेणाभु स्थूलम् अपिहितं प्रकृत्यात्मनि विशेषरूपं लीनम् इत्य् अर्थः । एतावताव्याकृतावस्था जगतो द्योतिता । चतुर्थेन पादेनाद्या सृष्ट्यवस्थोच्यते । तपसस्[^१६] तन् महिना महत्त्वेन एकं यद् आसीत् तद् अजायत विशेषात्मनाभिव्यज्यते स्म । कर्मवाशात् पुनः प्रादुर् बभूवेत्य् अर्थः । अथ वा तस्याम् अवस्थायां तपःकर्मणा[^१७] महत्त्वेन हिरण्यगर्भ आत्मनाजायत प्रादुर् आसीत् । यथा वक्ष्यति "ततः स्वयंभूः" इति (म्ध् १.६ ) ।


[^१७]:
     M G: tamaḥkarmaṇā


[^१६]:
     M G: tamasas

- सामान्यतो दृष्टेन महाप्रलयो ऽपि संभाव्यते । यस्य ह्य् एकदेशे नाशो दृष्टस् तस्य सर्वस्यापि नाशो दृश्यते । यथा शालापि क्वचिद् दह्यमाना दृष्टा कदाचित् सर्वो ग्रामो दह्यते । ये च कर्तृपूर्वा भावास् ते सर्वे विनश्वरा गृहप्रासादादयः । कर्तृपूर्वं चेदं जगत् सरित्समुद्रशैलाद्यात्मकम् । अतो गृहादिवन् नङ्क्ष्यतीति संभाव्यते । कर्तृपूर्वतैव न सिद्धेति चेत्, तन्निवेशविशेषवत्वादिना गृहादिवत् सापि साध्यत इत्यादि सामान्यतो दृष्टम् । 

- न च प्रमाणशुद्धौ तदूषणे वा प्रयतामहे ऽनिन्दंपरत्वाच् छास्त्रस्य । एतद् धि यावन् न विचार्य निरूपितं तावन् न सम्यग् अवधार्यते । तथानिरूपणे च तर्कशास्त्रता स्यान् न धर्मशास्त्रता ग्रन्थविस्तरश् च प्रसज्यते । 

- प्रक्रियाबहुलं चेदं सर्वम् उपन्यसिष्यते । क्वचित् पौराणी प्रक्रिया, क्वचित् सांख्यानाम् । न तया ज्ञातयाज्ञातया वा कश्चिद् धर्माधर्मयोर् विशेष इति निपुणतया न निरूप्यते । अर्थिता चेत् तत एवान्वेष्या । पदार्थयोजनाव्याख्यानमात्रं त्व् अध्यायस्योपदिश्यते तद् एव करिष्यामः । तात्पर्यम् उपदर्शितम् एव । 

- **आसीद् इदं** जगत् **तमोभूतं** तम इव । भूतशब्दो ऽनेकार्थो ऽप्य्[^१८] उपमायां प्रयुक्तः । यथा "यत् तद् भिन्नेष्व् अभिन्नं छिन्नेष्व् अच्छिन्नं सामान्यभूतं स शब्दः" इति सामान्यभूत इति सामान्यम् इवेत्य् अर्थः । किं तमसा जगतः सादृश्यम् अत आह- **अप्रज्ञातम्** । विशेषाणां स्वभावानां विकाराणां प्रकृताव् उपलयनाद् अतः प्रत्यकेणाज्ञातम् । अनुमानात् तर्हि ज्ञायेत । तद् अपि **चालक्षणम्** । लक्षणं लिङ्गं चिह्नम्, तद् अपि तस्याम् अवस्थायां प्रलीनम् एव, सर्वविकाराणां विशेषात्मना विनष्टत्वात् । **अप्रतर्क्यम्** । यद्रूपम् आसीत् तर्कयितुम् अपि न तद्रूपतया शक्यम् । तर्कप्रकारम्[^१९] अनुमानं निषेधति । न सामान्यतो दृष्टम् अनुमानम् अस्ति । तद्रूपकावेदकं न विशेषतो दृष्टम् अतश् **चाविज्ञेयम्** । 


[^१९]:
     J: sarvaprakāram


[^१८]:
     G J: 'hy (ahi here makes no sense. Probably a typo of G followed by J; I follow Mandlik's reading)

- नैव तर्ह्य् आसीद् असद् एवाजायतेति प्राप्तम् एतन् निषेधति- **प्रसुप्तम् इव सर्वतः** । नासतः सत उत्पत्तिः । उक्तं च "सद् एव सोम्येदम् अग्र आसीत् । कथम् असतः सज् जायेत" (छु ६.२.१–२) इत्याद्य् उपनिषत्सु । अतश् चाविज्ञेयम् अवच्छेदविषयैः प्रमाणैः । आगमात् तादृशाद् एव गम्यते । प्रसुप्तम् इव जाग्रत्स्वप्नवत्तां परित्यज्य संप्रसादावस्था सुषुप्तिर् दृष्टान्तत्वेनोपात्ता । यथा "अयम् आत्मा सुषुप्त्यवस्थायां निःसंबोधक्लेशप्रध्वस्ताशेषविकप आस्ते, न च नास्तीति शक्यते वक्तुम्, प्रबुद्धस्य सुखम् अस्वाप्सम्" इति प्रत्यभिज्ञानदर्शनात् । एवं जगदागमात् सिद्धार्थरूपाद् आभासानुमानेभ्यश् च तार्किकाणाम् अवसीयते । **आसीद्** इति । वर्तमाना तु सावस्था न कस्यचित्[^२०] विज्ञेयेत्य् अत उक्तम् **अविज्ञेयम्** । सर्वतो नैकदेशप्रलय इत्य् अर्थः ॥ १.५ ॥


[^२०]:
     M G: kasya
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

At the very outset there arises an objection—

> “Where we began and whereto we are carried! Manu was asked to expound
> the duties laid down in the scriptures, and he promised to expound
> them; under the circumstances, the description of the world in its
> undifferentiated state (with which the present verse begins) is wholly
> irrelevant and purposeless. In fact it becomes a true case of the
> well-known proverb —‘ Being questioned about mangoes, he describes the
> Kovidāra tree.’ Further, there is no authority in support of what is
> here described; nor is any useful purpose served by it. So the whole
> of this First Discourse need not be studied at all.”

Our answer to the above is follows:—What the First Discourse does is to
describe the fact of the Treatise having an extensive scope; so that
what is described here is the whole range of the cosmic process,
beginning with Brahman down to the inanimate objects, as forming the
basis of *Dharma* and *Adharma*, Right and Wrong; for instance, verse 49
describes the vegetable objects as ‘wrapped in manifold Darkness, the
result of their own acts’ \[which shows that plants also are related to,
and affected by, Right and Wrong\]; and later on, again in Discourse 1,
verse 23, it will be stated that ‘having recognised, by means of his
intellect, these transitions of the individual soul, through merit and
demerit, (Right and Wrong), one should fix his attention upon the
Right.’ From all this it follows that Right is the cause of superiority
(in the scale of existence) and Wrong of the reverse; thus the present
treatise, expounding the exact nature of Right and Wrong, serves an
extensive purpose, and as such should be studied. Such is the purport of
the First Discourse.

The authority for what is declared in the present verse consists of
*Mantra, Arthavāda* and *Inference*. As for the *Mantra* we have the
following (in *Ṛgveda*, 10.129.3)—‘Darkness existed, enveloped in
darkness, uncognised in the beginning; this whole existed in a fluid
state; the gross was contained in the subtile; the one entity that
existed came to lie born, by virtue of austerities.’ The meaning is as
follows:—‘At the Universal Dissolution, the Sun, the Moon, the Fire and
other sources of light having been destroyed, there existed Darkness
alone;—this (subtile) Darkness was ‘enveloped,’ wrapped, in Darkness in
the gross form; at this time there was no cogniser; hence, there being
no one to cognise things, there was no *cognition* of anything;
therefore Darkness is described as enveloped in darkness;—‘in the
beginning,’ *i.e*. before elemental creation, it was ‘uncognised,’
unknown; ‘this whole existed in the fluid state,’ *i.e*. every active or
mobile object was motionless; the ‘gross,’ the larger, ‘was contained in
the subtile,’ the smaller; *i.e*. every differentiated object was
resolved into its original evolvents; this indicates the
undifferentiated state of the world; and the last foot of the Mantra
describes the earliest stage of evolution; that ‘one entity’ which
‘existed’ ‘came to be born, by virtue of austerities,’ *i.e*. by the
force of austerity it became manifested in differentiated forms; *i.e*.
under the influence of past acts, it came into existence again; or, it
may mean that under the conditions described, Hiraṇyagarbha, came into
existence by himself, by virtue of his austerities; as described later
on (verso 6)—‘Thereupon the self-born &c. &c.’

The possibility of Universal Dissolution is proved by Inference: That
which has been found to bo destroyed in one part is also found to be
destroyed in its entirety; *e.g*. at one time a single house is found to
be burnt, and at another time the entire village is burnt (this is the
Major Premise); all such things as are produced by active agents,—such
for instance, as houses, palaces and the like are found to be liable to
destruction (this is the second step in the inferential process);—this
world, consisting of rivers, oceans, mountains &c., is the work of an
active agent (this is the third step);—hence it follows that, like the
house &c., the whole world will come to destruction (this is the final
conclusion). It will not be right to argue that the fact of the world
being the work of an active agent is itself not yet established;—for
that fact also is deduced from the fact of the world having, like the
house and such things, a particular shape;—all this constitutes the
Inference (upon which the statements in the present verse are based).

We do not make any attempt either at clarifying (discussing and
strengthening) the said proofs, or at refuting (the counter-arguments);
because the present treatise does not deal with proofs and reasonings;
and reasonings could not be fully grasped until they have been fully
stated and examined; and if all this were done, the work would become a
treatise on ‘Reasonings,’ not on ‘Law;’ and further, it would become too
prolix.

This subject (of Creation and Dissolution) in its details shall be found
described (in verses 7 *et seq*.) and the process described shall be in
some places in accordance with the Purāṇas and sometimes in accordance
with the *Sāṅkhya* doctrines. But the knowing or not knowing of those
details does not make any difference in *Right* and *Wrong*; hence we
are not going to deal with it in detail. If any person stands in need of
the detailed account of the process, be should search for it in the said
sources of information. What we undertake to do is to construe and
explain the words of the text, and this is all that we shall do. A brief
exposition of the purport of the Discourse we have already given.

‘*This*,’ world, ‘*was in exitence*,’ ‘*in the form of dense
Darkness*’—*i.e*. as if it were dense darkness; the term ‘which has
several meanings, is here used to denote *similarity*; just as in the
statement ‘*yat tad bhinneṣvabhinnam chinneṣvachinnam sāmānyabhūtam sa
śabdaḥ*’ (‘that which remains the same even though the things denoted by
it are diverse; which remains undestroyed even when the things denoted
are destroyed, *which is, as if it were, a Generality*, this is the
Word’), the word ‘*samānyābhūtaḥ*’ means ‘as if it were a generality.’
“What is it that constitutes the similarity of the World to Darkness?”

The answer is given by the next word ‘*unperceived*;’ in as much as all
the products with their diverse differentiated forms are at the time
resolved in the Evolvent Original, the world is *not p* *erceived*.

It might have been cognised by means of Inference; but that also is not
possible; as it is ‘*undifferentiated*’; the ‘differential’ meant is
that character which distinguishes one thing from another; and this also
is dissolved at the time; for the simple reason that all products, with
their distinguishing features, have been destroyed.

‘*Incogitable*’—that form in which the World existed was not capable of
being even thought of, in that form; ‘cogitation’ here stands, for all
forms of Inference; the meaning being that at the time there was no kind
of Inference—neither from generals to particulars, nor from particulars
to generals—available, by means of which the World could be
cognised.—For these reasons it was also ‘*incognizable*.’

From all this it might follow that the World did not exist at all, and
it was only a non-existent World that came into existence
(subsequently); with a view to preclude this, the text adds—‘*as if
wholly merged in deep sleep*.’ As a matter of fact, the *existent* can
never come into existence out of the *non-existent*; it has been
declared in the Upanisads (the *Chāndogya*)—‘O dear one, this was, in
the beginning existent; how could the existent be born out of the
non-existent?’—All that is meant is that the World is incognizable by
the instrumentality of the ordinary means of cognition, which operate
through, and bear upon, only differentiated things; that such is its
condition is known from the scriptures, which also are as transcendental
in their character as the ante-natal condition of the World.

‘*As if merged in deep sleep*,’—‘deep sleep’ stands for that condition
of repose which is beyond the conditions of waking and dreaming; and it
has been cited only by way of illustration; the meaning being—‘just as
the soul, in the condition of deep sleep, remains entirely unconscious
of any thoughts or sufferings, and free from all notions of
diversity,—and yet it cannot be said to be non-existent, because on
waking, it is recognised as being the same that was asleep, as shown by
the idea *I have slept soundly*,—exactly the same is the case with the
World, as is shown by the scriptures that describe things as they have
actually existed, and also proved, for those who depend upon reasonings,
by what appear to be sound Inferences.’

‘*Was in existence*’—the past tense has been used, because the condition
described can never be known by any person; hence it is that it has been
described as ‘incognizable.’

‘*Wholly*’—this shows that the dissolution is not *partial* but *total*.
(5)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Tamas*’ is generally taken here in the sense of the ‘Root evolvent’,
only Rāghavānanda taking it in the sense of the Vedantic *māyā*; he is
supported by Sāyaṇa who explains the term similarly, under his
explanation of Ṛgveda 18. 129. 8.

P. 8, l. 8—(1) *tam āsīt* (Ṛgveda 10.129.8)—Sāyaṇa supplies a somewhat
different explanation:

> इदं जगत् सलिलं कारणेन सातम् अविभागापन्नम् भाः आसीत् । अथवा सलिलमिव, यथा क्षीरेण विभागापन्नं नीरस ज्ञायते तथा तमसा ऽविभागापन्नं जगत् न ज्ञायते । आ समन्तात् भवतीति 'आभु'। 'तपसः' स्रष्टव्य-पर्यालोचमरूपस्य ।

As a Vedāntin, Sāyaṇa identifies *tamas* with *māyā* \|
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	This (universe) existed in the shape of Darkness, unperceived, destitute of distinctive marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly immersed, as it were, in deep sleep.
</details>
