+++
title = "007 यो ऽसाव्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He,—who is apprehended beyond the senses, who is subtile, unmanifest and eternal, absorbed in all created things and inconceivable,—appeared by himself. (7)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२२]:
     M G: eva

**यो ऽसाव्** इति सर्वनामभ्यां सामान्यतः प्रसिद्धम् इव परं ब्रह्मओद्दिशति । यो ऽसौ वेदान्तेष्व् अन्यासु चाध्यात्मविद्यास्व् इतिहासपुराणेषु च प्रसिद्धो वक्ष्यमाणैर् धर्मैः स एष प्रादुर् आसीद् इत्य् अत्रोक्तः । **स्वयम् उद्बभाव्** उद्भूतः शरीरग्रहणं कृतवान् । भातिर् अनेकार्थत्वाद् उद्भवे वर्तते । अथ वा दीप्त्यर्थ एव । स्वयंप्रकाश आसीन् नादित्याद्यालोकापेक्षः । इन्द्रियाणाम् अत्ययो[^२३] ऽतीन्द्रियम् । अव्ययीभावः । **अतीन्द्रियग्राह्यः** सुप्सुपेतिसमासः । इन्द्रियाण्य् अतिक्रम्य गृह्यते, न कदाचिद् इन्द्रियस्य गोचरः । अन्यद् एव तद् योगजज्ञानं येन गृह्यते । अथ वेन्द्रियाण्य् अतिक्रान्तम् अतीन्द्रियम् मन उच्यते । परोक्षत्वाद् इन्द्रियाणाम् अविषयः । यथा च वैशेषिकाः "युगपज् ज्ञानानुत्पत्तिर् मनसो लिङ्गम्" (न्यास् १.१.१६) इत्य् आनुमानिकत्वं मनसः प्रतिपन्नाः । तेन गृह्यते । तथा च भवान् व्यासः-


[^२३]:
     J: atīto

- नैवासौ चक्षुषा ग्राह्यो न तु शिष्टैर् अपीन्द्रियैः ।

- मनसा तु प्रसन्नेन[^२४] गृह्यते सूक्ष्मदर्शिभिः ॥ इति ।


[^२४]:
     M J: prayatnena; but the commentary clearly presupposes "prasannena".

प्रसन्नेन रागादिदोषैर् अकलुषितेन तदुपासनापरत्वेन लब्धसूक्ष्मदर्शनशक्तिभिः । सूक्ष्म इव **सूक्ष्मो** ऽनुः । न ह्य् असाव् अणुस्थूलादिविकल्पानाम् आश्रयः । सर्वविकल्पातीतो ह्य् असौ । उक्तं च- 

- यः सर्वपरिकल्पानाम् आभासे ऽप्य् अनवस्थितः ।

- तर्कागमानुमानेन बहुधा परिकल्पितः ॥

- व्यतीतो भेदसंसर्गाद् भावाभावौ क्रमाक्रमौ ।

- सत्यानृते च विश्वात्मा स विवेकात् प्रकाशते ॥ इति ।

सूक्ष्मत्वाद् **अवक्तः** **सनातनो** ऽव्यक्तस्वाभाविकेनानादिनिधनेनैश्वर्येण युक्तः । येषाम् अपि कर्मप्राप्यं हैरण्यगर्भं पदं तन्मते ऽपि सनातनत्वं सत्य् अप्य् आदिमत्त्वे ऽन्तत्वाभावात् । न हि सर्गादिफलभोक्तृत्वावस्था कदाचिद् अपैति । 

- सर्वाणि भूतानि मया स्रष्टव्यानीत्य् एवंभावितचित्तो भूतात्मा एवंसंपन्नः सर्वभूतमय इत्य् उच्यते । यथा मृन्मयो घटो मृद्विकारत्वान् मृद्भिर् आरब्धशरीर एवं यः कश्चित् किंचिद् अत्यन्तं भावयति स तन्मय इत्य् उपचाराद् उच्यते । यथा स्त्रीमयो ऽयं पुरुषः ऋङ्मयो यजुर्मय इति । अथ वाद्वैतदर्शने- नैव चेतनाचेतनानि भूतानि पृथक्त्वेन सन्ति, तस्यैवायं विवर्तः । अतो विवर्तानां भूतमयत्वात् तैश् च तस्याभेदाद् युक्तम् एव तन्मयत्वम् । कथं पुनर् एकस्य नानारूपविवर्तितोपपत्तिर् एकत्वाद् विरोधिनी उचयते । एवम् आहुर् विवर्तवादिनः । यथा समुद्राद् वायुनाभिहता ऊर्मयः समुत्तिष्ठन्ति, ते च न ततो भिद्यन्ते नापि लिप्यन्ते । सर्वथा बेधाभेदाभ्याम् अनिर्वाच्याः, एवम् अयं ब्रह्मणो विश्वविवर्तः । अपिशब्दश् चात्र द्रष्टव्यः । स्वरूपे स्थितो ऽग्राह्यो विवर्तावस्थायाम् इन्द्रियग्राह्यः । एवं सूक्ष्मः । अपिशब्दात् स्थूलावस्थायां स्थूलः । अव्यक्तो व्यक्तश् च । शाश्वतो ऽशाश्वक्तश् च । भूतमयस् तद्रूपहितश् च । विवर्तावस्थाभेदेनैव व्याख्येयम् । 

- **अचिन्त्यः** आश्चर्यरूपः सर्वविलक्षणया शक्त्या योगात् ॥ १.७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He*, *who*’—these two pronouns refer to something well-known, that is
(in the present context) the ‘Supreme Brahman,’ he who is described, in
the Vedanta texts as also in other philosophical systems, in the
Itihāsas and Purāṇas, as having the qualities going to be described in
the present verse.

‘*He appeared by himself*’—*i.e*. took a body for himself; the root
‘*bhā*,’ having several meanings, is here used in the sense of *coming
into existence*; or, it may be taken in its usual sense of *shining*;
the meaning being that he was self-effulgent, and did not need the light
from the sun or other sources.

‘*Atīndriya*’ means that which is *beyond the senses*, the compound
being taken as an *Avyayībhāva*; the compound ‘*atīndriyagrāhyaḥ*’ being
included under the general rule of compounds formulated in Pāṇini’s
*Sūtra* 2.1.4; the mean ing being that *he is apprehended beyond the
senses*, he never comes within range of the senses; it is an entirely
different kind of cognition, the intuitive cognition of the *yogin*, by
which he is apprehended. Or, the compound ‘*that which is beyond the
senses*’ may be taken as standing for the *Mind*, which, being
imperceptible, is not perceived by the senses; it is for this reason
that the *Vaiśeṣikas* have held Mind to be ‘cognisable by means of
Inference,’ as stated in the *Nyāya-sūtra* (1.1.16)—‘The fact that
cognitions do not appear simultaneously is indicative of the Mind.’ And
it is by means of this Mind alone that the said Being is apprehended.
Says the revered Vyāsa also—‘He is not perceptible by the eye, nor by
the other senses; he is apprehended by means of the clear Mind, by
persons endowed with subtle powers of cognition’;—*i.e*. not sullied by
the defects of passion &c.;—by persons who have acquired the powers of
subtle perception, by virtue of their being entirely devoted to the
worship of the said Being.

‘*Subtile*’—*i.e. as if* he were ‘subtile,’ small; inreality he is not
the substratum of any such finite or concrete predications or concepts
as ‘large’ or ‘small;’ he is, in fact, beyond all such predications; as
is declared in the following passage—‘He is free even from the semblance
of all predications; he has been variously conceived of on the strength
of scriptures and inference, he is beyond all taint of duality, beyond
affirmation and denial, beyond sequentiality and non-sequentiality,
beyond reality and unreality; he is the very soul of the universe, and
becomes cognised only by means of discriminative wisdom.’

Because he is ‘subtile,’ he is ‘*unmanifest, eternal*;’ being of subtile
nature, he is endowed with beginningless and endless puissance, home
people have held that the position of ‘Hiraṇyagarbha’ is attained by
(ordinary beings) through (meritorious) acts; according to these people
also he is ‘everlasting,’ in the sense that, though lie has beginning,
he has no end; because his condition, which consists in being the
experiencer of the fruits emanating from his original act of bringing
about creation, never comes to an end.

Ho is described as ‘*absorbed in all created things*’ in the sense that
he is the very soul of things, having his mind intent upon the idea that
‘all things are to be created by me;’ when for instance, the jar made of
clay, having its body built out of clay, is said to be ‘absorbed in
(consisting of) the clay;’ similarly when a certain person ponders too
much over a thing, he is described figuratively, as ‘absorbed’ in that
thing; as we find in such expressions as—‘this person is absorbed in
women,’ ‘he is absorbed in the Ṛgveda,’ ‘he is absorbed in the
Yajurveda,’ and so forth. Or, it may be in view of the *Advaita*,
‘Nondualistic,’ Philosophy, by which sentient as well as insentient
tilings have no existence apart from Hiraṇyagarbha, all being his
illusory modifications; so that these modifications consisting of the
created things, and these being non-different from him, it is only right
that he should be described as ‘absorbed in (consisting of) created
tilings.’—

“But how can the single entity undergo illusory modifications? It would
be inconsistent with its unity.”

The answer given by the upholders of the theory of ‘illusory
modifications’ is as follows:—When the surface of the sea is struck by
the winds, high waves rise out of it, and these waves are not entirely
apart from the sea, nor are they totally absorbed in it; and they cannot
be described as either ‘different’ or ‘non-different’ from it; exactly
similar is the case with the ‘illusory modifications’ of Brahman.

The term ‘also’ may also be supplied to the words of the text; the sense
being—‘even though, in his own pristine form, he is imperceptible, he
becomes perceptible in the form of the ‘modifications;’ similarly with
the epithet ‘*subtile*;’ the implication of ‘also’ being that he is
gross in the form of the grosser modifications; similarly, he is
‘*unmanifest*’and *also* ‘manifest,’ ‘eternal’ and *also* ‘not eternal,’
‘*absorbed in created things*’ and *also* ‘free from their forms (and
limitations);’ all this being in reference to him in the condition of
‘modifications.’

‘*Inconceivable*’—*i.e*. his character is marvellous, he being possessed
of remarkable powers.—(7)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Sūkṣmaḥ*:—‘unperceivable by the external senses’: (Kullūka). But this
would be a repetition of *atīndriyagrāhyaḥ*’; hence Govinda renders it
as ‘who is perceivable by subtle understanding only;’ and
Rāghavānanda—‘who is without parts’—which is, as Kullūka makes out to
be, the meaning of ‘*avyaktaḥ*.’

*Sarvabhūtamayaḥ*—Medhātithi has offered two explanations: (1) ‘entirely
taken up by the idea of creating tilings’, and (2) ‘whose modification
all tilings are’. The latter explanation is practically accepted by all
the commentators.

*Udbhabau*—‘Assumed a body’: (Medhātithi and Govinda) or ‘shone forth’
(alternative suggested by Medliātitlii); ‘appeared in the form of the
products’: (Kullū.)—‘became discernible’ (Nandana).

*Medhātithi*, P. 10, l. 7—‘*Tathā ca Vaiśeṣikāḥ*’;—The sūtra quoted is
Gautama’s *Nyāya-sūtra*, 1.1.10. It seems that even so early as
Medhātithi’s time ‘*Nyāya*’ and *Vaiśeṣika*’ were used as convertible
terms.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	He who can be perceived by the internal organ (alone), who is subtile, indiscernible, and eternal, who contains all created beings and is inconceivable, shone forth of his own (will).
</details>
