+++
title = "019 तेषाम् इदम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From out of the Subtile constituents of the frames of the said exceedingly potent principles is produced this (Gross Body)—the perishable proceeding from the imperishable.—(19)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सूक्ष्मात् स्थूलम् उत्पद्यते संभवति । **अव्ययाद् व्ययम्** इत्य् एतावति तात्पर्यम् । न तु षण्णां सप्तानां वा तत्त्वानां मात्राभ्य इति । चतुर्विंशतितत्त्वानि । तानि सृष्टौ सर्वेषां निमित्तम् । अथ वा पिण्डसृष्टौ सप्तैव प्रधानं कारणम्, षडविशेषाः सप्तमो महान् । तेभ्यो भूतेन्द्रियाण्य् उत्पद्यन्ते । तेषु चोत्पन्नेषु पिण्डीभवति शरीरम् ।

- **अव्ययात्**[^५०] प्रधानाद् उपसंभृतसर्वविकाराद् एकीभूताद् इदं बहुधा विप्रकीर्णं विश्वरूपं जगद् उत्पद्यते । किं युगपद् एव समस्तैर् विकारैः स्थूलरूपैः प्रधानं विक्रियते । नेत्य् आह । **तेषाम् इदम्** इति । यादृशः प्राग् उक्तः क्रमस् तेनैव । "प्रकृतेर् महांस् ततो ऽहंकारस् तस्माद् गुणस् तु षोडशकः" इति (सांक् २२) । पुरुषशब्दस् तत्त्वे पुरुषार्थत्वात् प्रयुक्तः । **महौजसां** स्वकार्ये वीर्यवताम् । अपरिमितविकारहेतुत्वान् महत्वम् । तेषां याः **सूक्ष्मा मूर्तिमात्रा** मूर्तिः शरीरम्, तदर्था मात्रास्, ताभ्य इदं भवति । अत उच्यते । **अव्ययाद् व्ययम्** इति । काः पुनस् तेषां सूक्ष्मा मात्राः । न हि तन्मात्राणाम् अन्या मात्राः संभवन्ति येन तेषां सूक्ष्मा मात्रा इति व्यतिरेक उपपद्यते । न तेषां स्वागतमात्रापेक्षत्वम् । किं तर्हि । तन्मात्रेभ्यः सूक्ष्मो महान् महतः प्रभूर्[^५१] इति ॥ १.१९ ॥


[^५१]:
     J: prakṛtir


[^५०]:
     M G 1st ed.: atha yāvat
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

All that is meant by saying that ‘*the perishable proceeds from the
imperishable*’ is that the Gross is produced out of the Subtile; and it
is not meant to emphasise whether it is produced out of the particles of
*six* or *seven* Principles; in fact there are twenty-four Principles,
all of which form the cause of the origin of all things. Or, the meaning
may be that in the production of the gross oḥjeot only seven Principles
form the principal cause, *e.g*., the six non-differentiated Principles
(the live Rudimentary Substances and the principle of Egoism) and the
seventh, the Great Principle of Intelligence. Out of these (seven) are
produced the Elemental Substances and the Organs; and when these latter
have been produced, the gross body becomes formed.

\[It has been said that\] from out of the imperishable Primordial
Matter,—which in its unified form, contains within itself the
possibilities of all its evolutes,—is produced this world, which is
multifarious in its character and appears in all possible forms.

Now the question arises—Docs the Primordial Matter become modified into
all its gross evolutes at one and the same time? And the answer to this
is ‘No;’ what really happens is described in the present verse—‘*From
out of the subtile*, &c., &c.,’ The order in which the things are
produced is the same as that which has been described before: that is,
from out of Primordial Matter is produced the Great Principle of
Intelligence;—from this latter the Principle of Egoism; and from this
latter again the ‘group of sixteen’ (*kārikā*, 22).

The term ‘*Puruṣa*’ has been used in the sense of the *Principles*, on
the ground that these latter subserve the purposes of the *Puruṣa*
(Soul).

‘*Exceedingly potent*’—capable of producing their effects; it is because
they are the cause of innumerable products that they have been called
‘*exceedingly*.’

The said principles have certain ‘*subtile constituents of their
frames*’;—‘*mūrti*’ is *frame*; the constituents that go to form that
frame are called ‘*constituents of the frame*’; from out of these is
born ‘*this*’ (the gross Body). It is in reference to this that it is
added—‘*the perishable proceeding out of the imperishable*.’

*Question*—“What are the ‘*subtile* constituents’ of the said
Principles? Certainly the Rudimentary Substances have no other
‘constituents’ (save those that are *subtile*), in reference to (for the
exclusion of) which such specification could be possible (as that
intended by the epithet ‘subtile’).”

*Answer*—The qualification ‘subtile' is not in relation to the
constituents of any single Principle itself; what is meant is that (one
principle is ‘subtile’ in relation to, in comparison to, another,
*i.e*.) the Great Principle of Intelligence is subtile as compared to
the Rudimentary Substances, and the Root Evolvent (Primordial Matter) is
‘subtile’ as compared to the Great Principle.

\[Another explanation of the verse is given below, in the form of an
introduction to verse 20\].—19
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The ‘seven’ are made up of—

\(1\) Egoism, the five subtile elements and the Mahat (Medhātithi,
Govinda and Kullūka);—(2) *Ātman* instead of *Mahat* (Nārāyana and
Nandana). Medhātithi notes another enumeration suggested by ‘others’—(1)
The five organs of Perception, (2) the five organs of Action and (3),
(4), (5), (6) and, (7) the five grogs elemental substances.’

The name ‘*puruṣa*’ has been applied to the Tattvas, Principles,—because
‘they serve the purposes of the, soul’ (Medhātithi),—or because ‘they
are produced by the Puruṣa, Ātman,’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

019	But from minute body (-framing) particles of these seven very powerful Purushas springs this (world), the perishable from the imperishable.
</details>
