+++
title = "020 आद्याद्यस्य गुणम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among these (Elementary Substances), each succeeding one acquires the quality of what precedes it; and each elemental substance is endowed with as many qualities as the place it occupies (in the order in which the said substances are set forth).—(20)


“Why does the Author use the form ‘ādyādyasya’? The correct form should be ‘ādyasyādyasya’, the repetition of the term ‘ādyasya’ being necessitated by Pāṇini’s Sūtra 8.1.4; just as we have in such expressions as ‘paraḥ paraḥ.’”
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वश्लोके केचिद् अन्यथा सप्तसंख्या परिकल्पयन्ति । पञ्चेन्द्रियाणि चक्षुरादीनि वर्गीकृतान्य् एकीभवन्ति । बोधहेतुतयैकेन धर्मेण योगाद् एकत्वेन निर्दिश्यन्ते । एवं कर्मेन्द्रियाणि । तौ च वर्गद्वित्वाद् द्वौ पुरुषौ भवतः । पञ्चभूतानि भेदेनैव निर्दिष्टानि कर्यवैलक्षण्यात् । तद् एवं सप्तपुरुषास् तेषां या मूर्त्यर्थाः सूक्ष्मा मात्रा निर्माणकार्याणि तन्मात्राण्य् अहंकारश् च । अन्यत् समानम् । 

- अतश् च भूतानां पूर्वश्लोके संनिधानाद् **एषाम्** इति तेषाम् प्रतिनिर्देशः । यद्य् अपि च व्यवहिते बहूनि वचनानि[^५२] संनिहितानि तथापि य इहार्थः प्रतिपाद्यते विशिष्टसंख्याकर्तृगुणवत्त्वं तद् भूतानाम् एव संभवति नान्येषां, प्रकृतत्वे सत्य् अपि । 


[^५२]:
     M G 1st ed.: ca tāni

- अतो ऽयं श्लोकार्थः । एषां भूतानां यद् यत आद्यं[^५३] तस्य यद्रूपं ततो ऽनन्तरं पठितं तत् तत् पूर्वस्य संबन्धेन गुणं गृह्णाति । गुणशब्देन शब्दादयः पञ्चोच्यन्ते । आद्यत्वं चात्र वक्ष्यमाणया व्यवस्थया "आकाशं जायते" (म्ध् १.७५) इति । गुणत्वं च शब्दादीनां तत्रैव वक्ष्यति । यो य आकाशादिलक्षणो ऽर्थो **यावतिथः** यावतां पूरणः । "वतोर् इथुक्" (पाण् ५.२.५३) । द्वितीये तृतीये ऽवस्थाने स्थितः स **तावद्गुणः** । तावन्तो गुणास् तस्य भवन्ति । द्वितीयस्थाने स्थितो द्विगुण इत्यादि । परस्पराद्याद्यगुणसंबन्धित्वं प्रथमे ऽर्धश्लोक उक्तम् । तत्र यः स्वशब्देन यस्यैव यो गुणो ऽभिहितः "तस्य शब्दगुणं विदुः," (म्ध् १.७५) "तद् रूपगुणम् उच्यते" (म्ध् १.७७) इत्यादि । ततश् च पूर्वगुणावाप्तौ द्वैगुण्यम् आकाशं वर्जयित्वा भूतानां प्राप्तम् । अत उक्तम् **यो यो यावतिथ** इति । तेन द्विगुणो वायुस् त्रिगुणं तेजस् चतुर्गुणा आपः पञ्चगुणा भूमिर् इति । आद्याद्यस्येति कथम् । आद्यस्याद्यस्येह भवितव्यम् । नित्यवीप्सयोर् इति द्विवचनेन । यथा परः पर इति । छन्दोभिर् अविशेषात् स्मृतीनां लुग्वृत्तानुरोधाच् चैवं पठितम् ॥ १.२० ॥


[^५३]:
     M G 1st ed.: yadādyantavat
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the preceding verse some people offer a different explanation of the
number ‘seven’:—(1) The five *organs of sensation*, the Eye and the
rest, taken together from a single group; they are regarded as ‘one’ on
account of their possessing the common character of being *the
instruments of perception*;—(2) similarly the five *organs of action*;
these two, forming two groups, are ‘*two* principles’;—(3-7) the five
elemental substances, being treated individually, by reason of their
functions being distinct from one another, are the ‘*seven principles*’;
and the five Rudimentary Substances and the principle of Egoism are the
‘subtile constituents’ that go to make up the ‘bodies’ of the said
seven;—*i.e*., these seven are the products of evolution from the said
six.—The rest of the verse is explained in the same manner as set forth
above.

Thus, in accordance with this explanation, the Elemental Substances
having been spoken of in the preceding verse (19), the pronoun ‘*eṣām*,’
‘*among these*,’ refers to those same substances. Though there are
several words intervening (between the mention of Elemental Substances
in verse (19) and the pronoun ‘among *these*’ in the present verse),
which are in closer proximity to the pronoun, yet, as a matter of fact,
what Is described in the present verse,—the fact of ‘these’ being
endowed with a particular number of qualities derived from well-defined
sources—is applicable only to the Elementary Substances, and not to
other things; even though these latter may form the subject-matter of
the context (and may as such, be capable of being referred to by the
pronoun in question).

The meaning of the verse thus comes to this:—‘*Among these*’ Elemental
Substances,—which are set out (later on) in a definite order of
sequence, one preceding the other—the ‘succeeding one’ acquires the
quality of the preceding one, through its connection with it.—The term
‘*quality*’ here stands for the five, Sound and the rest;—the
‘*preceding*’ (and ‘succeeding’) is in reference to the order in which
the names of the Elemental Substances are set forth in verse 75 below,
where it is said that ‘first of all Ākāśa is produced &c., &c.’ The fact
of sound &c., being the qualities of these substances will also bo
described in that same verse.—Among Ākāśa and the rest, each one
occupies a definite place in the order in which they are set forth; the
term ‘*yāvatithaḥ*’ means *the number of the place occupied by it*; the
word being formed by the adding of the affix ‘*ithuk*,’ by Pāṇini’s
*Sūtra* 5.2.53. The meaning is that each substance becomes endowed with
as many qualities as the place, *second* or *third*, &c., occupied by
it; that is, the substance occupying the *second* place in the order of
sequence has *two* qualities, that occupying the *third* place has
*three*, and so on.

The first half of the verse means that among the Elemental Substances,
each succeeding one acquires the quality of its predecessor; and each of
them is later on (under verses 75 &c.) described has having one quality
inherent in itself; for instance, ‘Ākāśa is known as possessing the
quality of sound’ (verse 75); ‘Fire is described as possessing the
quality of colour’ (verse 77), and so forth; so that acquiring one
quality from its predecessor (and having one inherent in itself) each
substance would appear to be endowed with only two qualities,—with the
sole exception of Ākāśa (which, having no substance ‘preceding’ it,
would have the single quality of Sound, which is inherent in itself);
hence with a view to preclude such an idea, the author has added the the
second half of the verse—*Each Elemental Substance being endowed with as
many qualities &c. &c*.,—which means that Wind has *two* qualities, Fire
has *three*, Water has *four*, and Earth has *five*.

> “Why does the Author use the form ‘*ādyādyasya*’? The correct form
> should be ‘*ādyasyādyasya*’, the repetition of the term ‘*ādyasya*’
> being necessitated by Pāṇini’s *Sūtra* 8.1.4; just as we have in such
> expressions as ‘*paraḥ paraḥ*.’”

The form used is due to the exigencies of metre; and exigencies of metre
justify the non-observance of rules.—(20)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Nandana places verse 27 before 20. There appears to be no justification
for deviating from the order adopted by all other commentators.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata*, 12.232.8.—‘The qualities of the preceding go over to the
succeeding and whatever it is and in whatever form and place, so many
qualities it is declared to possess.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

020	Among them each succeeding (element) acquires the quality of the preceding one, and whatever place (in the sequence) each of them occupies, even so many qualities it is declared to possess.
</details>
