+++
title = "021 सर्वेषान् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At the outset he designated distinct names for add things; and devised acts and Laws, on the basis of the words of the veda.—(21)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स** प्रजापतिः **सर्वेषाम्** अर्थानां **नामानि** चक्रे । यथा कश्चित् पुत्राणां जातानाम् अन्येषां वा संव्यवहारार्थं करोति- "वृद्धिर् आदैच्" (पाण् १.१.१), "धीश्रीस्त्रीम्" (पिङ्स् १.१.१) इति । शब्दार्थसंबन्धं कृतवान् "गौर् अश्वः पुरुषः" इति । **कर्माणि च निर्ममे** । धर्माधर्माख्यान्य् अदृष्टार्थान्य् अग्निहोत्रादीनि च । सृष्ट्वा च कर्माणि तत्र **संस्था** व्यवस्थाश् चकार- "इदं कर्म ब्राह्मणेनैव कर्तव्यं काले ऽमुष्मै च फलाय" । अथ वा दृष्टर्था मर्यादा **संस्था**- "गोप्रचार इह च प्रेदेशे न कर्तव्यः," "इदम् उदकं सस्यसेकार्थम् अमुष्मिन् ग्रामे न देयं यावत् तस्माद् ग्रामाद् अस्माभिर् अयम् उपकारो न लब्धः" । दृष्टार्थानि च कर्माणि निर्ममे । तत्र यान्य् अदृष्टार्थानि तानि **वेदशब्देभ्यो** वैदिकेभ्यो वाक्येभ्यः ।

- <u>ननु</u> सर्वस्य तेनैव सृष्टत्वात् तस्यैव स्वातन्त्र्याद् वेदं ससर्ज कर्मानुष्ठानपरिपालनार्थम् इत्य् एवं वक्तव्यम् । वेदसृष्टिश् च वक्ष्यते "अग्निवायुरविभ्यश् च" (म्ध् १.२३) इत्य् अत्रान्तरे ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । भिन्नम् अत्र दर्शनम् । केचिद् आहुर् अन्यस्मिन् कल्पे वेदास् तेनाधीतास् ते च महाप्रलयेन प्रलीनाः पुनर् अन्यस्मिन् कल्पे सुप्तप्रतिबुद्धवत् सर्वं प्रथमं प्रतिभाति, स्वप्नपठितो यथा कस्यचिच् छ्लोकः प्रतिभाति । भाति च वेदे "गौर् अनुबन्ध्यः" (शब् १०.४.३२), "अश्वस् तूपरो गोमृगः" (व्स् २४.१) इत्यादिवाक्येभ्यः शब्दानुस्मृतिपूर्वकं झट् इति तान् अर्थान् स्मृत्वोत्पद्यमानांश् च पदार्थान् दृष्ट्वा "अस्यार्थस्यायं[^५४] शब्दः कल्पान्तरे नामासीत्, संप्रत्य् अस्यैव क्रियताम्" इत्य् उभयं वेदशब्देभ्य एव नामानि कर्माणि च सृष्टवान् । अथ वा नैव वेदाः प्रलीयन्ते महाप्रलये ऽपि । यो ऽसौ पुरुषः केषांचिद् इष्टस् तथा वेदा आसते । स एवान्तरण्डं ब्रह्माक्यं पुरुषं निर्माय वेदान् अध्यापयामास । एवं स ब्रह्मा वेदशब्देभ्यः सर्वं निर्मितवान् । 


[^५४]:
     M G J: tasyārthasyāyaṃ (I follow DK 5: 87)

- यद् अत्र तत्त्वं तद् अस्माभिर् उक्तम् एव । अथ पौराणिकी प्रक्रिया प्रयुज्यते । सास्माभिः प्रदर्श्यत एव । **आदौ** जगत्सर्ग इत्य् अर्थः । अथ वा, **आदौ** यानि नामान्य् अनपभ्रष्टानि, न पुनर् इदानींतनान्य् अशक्तिजानि गव्यादीनि । **पृथक्**, न[^५५] यथा शरीरं च तत्त्वसमुदायरूपम्[^५६] एवं[^५७] निर्ममे । किं तर्हि, पृथक् ॥ १.२१ ॥


[^५७]:
     G: evaṃ na; 1st ed. adds na in parentheses with a question mark (na ?)


[^५६]:
     M: śarīratvasamudāyarūpam; G 1st ed: śarīraṃ ca samudāyarūpam


[^५५]:
     M G omit: na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He*,’ Prajāpati, ‘*designated the names of all things*’; just in the
same manner as people assign names to new-born children, or to other
things also, for the purpose of speaking of them in ordinary business;
as we find done in such assertions as, ‘*āt* and *aich* are called
*Vṛddhi*’ (Pāṇini 1.1.1), or ‘*Dhi-śrī-strī* &c.’ (Piṅgala). What is
meant is that he established a connection between a certain thing and a
certain term,—such terms, for instance, as ‘*ganḥ*’ (Cow), ‘*Aśvaḥ*’
(Horse) and ‘*Puruṣaḥ*’ (Man).

He devised also the *acts*, known as ‘*Dhaima-Adharma*’
(Virtue-Vice),—*i.e*., such acts as the *Agnithotra* and the like which
lead to transcendental results.

Having devised the *acts*, he devised also the ‘*laws*,’ the rules,
governing them; such for instance, as, ‘such and such an act should be
done by the Brāhmaṇa only, at such and such a time, for the purpose of
obtaining such and such a result.’—Or, ‘laws’ may be taken as referring
to the rules governing the ordinary acts with visible worldly results;
such, for instance, as ‘cattle should graze in such and such a place,’
‘this water should not be given for purposes of irrigation of crops to
such and such a village until we have secured such and such a benefit
from it in return.’—He devised also those acts that accomplish only
visible results; but those acts that accomplish transcendental results
he devised on the basis of Vedic declarations.

*Objection*—“As a matter of fact, all things have been created by
Brahmā; and since he is the only independent agent, the proper statement
would have been that ‘he devised the Veda for the purpose of
safeguarding the performaṅce of acts’; in fact the devising of the Veda
by Brahmā is going to be described even in the present context (in verse
23).”

*Answer*—On the subject of the origin of the Vedas, several theories
have been propounded: (1) Some people hold as follows:—Brahmā studied
the Vedas in a previous cycle;—at the following Universal Dissolution,
they disappeared;—in the succeeding cycle at first they were recollected
by Brahmā, just as if he had gone to sleep and had risen from it; in the
same manner as people remember a verse that came to their mind during a
dream;—the Veda having been thus recollected by him, he remembers the
words of such passages as “*gauranubandhyaḥ-aśvastuparo mṛgaḥ*
(Yajurveda-Vajasa. 24.1), and immediately there come to his mind the
things denoted by these words; so that as soon as these things are found
to have come into existence, he decides that, inasmuch as such as was
the name of this thing in the preceding cycle, it may have the same name
in this cycle also. So that he devised the *names* as well as the
*acts*, both *on the basis of the words of the Veda*.—(2) The other
theory is as follows:—Even at universal Dissolution the Vedas do not
disappear at all; they continue to exist for ever, just like the Supreme
Being postulated by certain philosophers. This same Supreme Being
created within the egg the being named Brahmā and taught him the Vedas;
and this Brahmā, *on the basis of the words of the Vedas*, devised every
thing.

What the real truth on this point is we have already set forth above;
while for one who seeks for an account in accordance with the Purāṇas,
we have just described the two theories that have been propounded.

‘*Ādau*,’ ‘*at the outset*’—at the time of world creation;—or, ‘*ādau*’
may be taken to mean ‘ever-lasting,’ referring to those names whose
original form has not become corrupted, as distinguished from such
corrupted names as ‘*gāvī*’ and the like, which owe their origin to the
incapacity of men (to pronounce the corect forms).

‘*Distinct*’—the names designated were in accordance with that
configuration of the body peculiar to each species; what he designated
was not merely a collective name (applicable to all animals),—but a
*distinct* name for each species.—(21)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata*, 12.232.26.—‘Out of the words of the Veda itself did He,
in the beginning, create the names of the sages, as also of all those
creations that are described in the Veda.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

021	But in the beginning he assigned their several names, actions, and conditions to all (created beings), even according to the words of the Veda.
</details>
