+++
title = "022 कर्मात्मनाञ् च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the sake of living beings intent upon action, he created the eternal sacrifice; as also the host of Gods and the subtile multitude of the lesser divinities, the Sādhyas.—(22)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कर्मात्मानः** शरीरिणः प्राणिनः कर्मसु तत्परा मनुष्या उच्यन्ते । तेषाम् अर्थसिद्धये **यज्ञम् असृजत्** । ये ब्रह्मोपासनास्व् अनभिरताः[^५८] पुत्रपश्वादिफलार्थिनो द्वैतपक्षाश्रितास् ते कर्मानुष्ठानपरत्वात् कर्मात्मान उच्यन्ते । षष्ठ्य् अपि तादर्थ्यं ब्रूत इति तदर्थं यज्ञम् असृजद् इति गम्यते । **देवानां च गणं** तदर्थम् एवासृजत् । **कर्मात्मनां** चेत्य् अयम् अदेशे **चः** पठितः । तस्य देशो देवानाम् इत्य् अतो ऽनन्तरम् । **यज्ञं** ससर्ज । अग्निर् अग्नीषोमाव् इन्द्राग्नी इत्यादिं यज्ञसिद्ध्यर्थं देवानां गणम् असृजत् । तथा **साध्यानां** देवानां गणम् इत्य् अनुषज्यते । भेदेनोपादानम् अहविर्भाक्त्वात् तेषां स्तुतिभाज एव ते केवलम् । "यत्र पूर्वे साध्याः सन्ति देवाः" (र्व् १०.९०.१६) इति । "साध्या वै नाम देवाः" इति । "साध्या वै नाम देवा आसन्" (प्ब् ८.३.५) । अथ वा ब्राह्मणपरिव्राजकवत् । सूक्ष्मं मरुतो रुद्राङ्गिरस इत्य् एतदपेक्षया साध्यगणः सूक्ष्मः । साध्यग्रहणं चान्यासाम् अप्य् अहविःसंबन्धिनीनां देवतानां वेनोस्तुनीतिर् इत्यादीनां प्रदर्शनार्थम् ।


[^५८]:
     M: abhiratāḥ; G: (na) abhiratāḥ

- अन्ये तु **कर्मात्मनां देवानां प्राणिनाम्** इति समानाधिकरणानि मन्यन्ते । कर्माणि आत्मा स्वभावप्रतिलम्भो[^५९] येषां ते कर्मात्मानः । यागादिकर्मनिर्वर्तनपरत्वात् प्रधानतया वा कर्मात्मानः । 


[^५९]:
     J: pratibho

- काश्चिद् देवता यागादिकर्मण्य् एव स्वरूपत इतिहासे श्रूयन्ते । यथेन्द्रो रुद्रो विष्णुर् इति । अन्यासां तु याग एव देवतात्वं न स्वरूपतः । अक्षा ग्रावाणो रथाङ्गानि । न हि यथा भारते इन्द्रादीनां वृत्रादिभिर् असुरैर् युद्धादि कर्म श्रूयते तथाक्षादीनां वर्ण्यते । अस्ति च सूक्ते हविःसंबन्धे तेषाम् अपि देवतात्वम् । अक्षाणां "प्रावेपा मा" (र्व् १०.३४.१) इति । ग्राव्णां "प्रैते वदन्तु" (र्व् १०.९४.१) इति । "वनस्पते वीड्वङ्गः" (र्व् ६.४७.२६) इति रथाङ्गानाम् । अत एव **प्राणिनाम्** इति । द्विविधा हि देवताः प्राणवत्यस् तद्रहिताश् च । यथेन्द्रादयः पुरुषविग्रहाः प्राणवन्तः पुराणे वर्ण्यन्ते, नाक्षादयः । इतिहासदर्शनाश्रयश्[^६०] चायं सर्वः सर्गादिप्रपञ्चः । चसब्दश् चात्र द्रष्टव्यः, प्राणिनाम् अप्राणिनाम् अपि । निरुक्तदर्शने ऽपि द्विविधा देवता । अश्वाः "मा नो ऽमित्रः" (र्व् १.१६२.१) इति । शकुनिः "कनिक्रदद्" (र्व् ५.८३.१) इति । गाव "आ गावो अग्मन्" इति (र्व् ६.२८.२) । एताः प्राणवत्यः । अप्राणा उक्ताः । **सनातन**ग्रहणं यज्ञविशेषणम् । पूर्वकल्पे ऽपि यज्ञस्य भावात् प्रवाहनित्यतया नित्यत्वम् ॥ १.२२ ॥


[^६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: itihāsadarśanā | ataś; G 2nd ed.: itihāsadarśanāś
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Living beings intent upon action*’—stands for human beings intent upon
the performance of actions; for the accomplishment of the purpose of
these, ‘*he created the sacrifice*.’ Those men are called ‘*intent upon
action*’ who, not giving themselves up to the worship of Brahman, still
hanker after such results as the obtaining of sons and cattle, etc., and
accepting the philosophy of Dualism, engage themselves in the
performance of actions.—The Genitive ending also (in the words
‘*Karmātmanām prāṇinām*) signifies ‘for the sake of’; hence the meaning
is that ‘he created the sacrifice *for the sake of* the said
beings.’—‘*The hosts of gods*’ also he created for the sake of
sacrifices.—The particle ‘*ca*’ is misplaced after ‘*Karmātmanām*’; its
proper place is after ‘*devānām*’; the meaning thus being—‘He created
the sacrifice, and for the sake of the due fulfilment of the sacrifice,
he created *also* the hosts of gods, such as Agni, Agni-Soma, Indra-Agni
and so forth.—He also created the multitude of the divinities called
‘*Sādhyas*’ ** —the word ‘*gaṇam*’ being construed with ‘*Sādhyānām*’
also. The *Sādhyas* are mentioned apart from the ‘Gods,’ because they
are not entitled to partake of the sacrificial offerings,—they being
entitled only to having hymns addressed to them. That the *Sādhyas* form
a particular class of divinities is shown by such passages as ‘In the
beginning there were the gods named Sādhyas’ (Ṛgveda 10.90.16).—Or the
separate mention of the ‘*Sādhyas*’ may be explained on the analogy of
such expressions as ‘*brāhmaṇa-parivrājaka*’ and the like \[the
‘Parivrājaka’, ‘wandering renunciate’ is a ‘Brāhmaṇa’ with some
qualifications; similarly the *Sādhyas* are *Devas* with the further
qualification that they are not entitled to a share of the
offerings\],—‘*Subtile*’—the multitude of *Sādhyas* is Subtile in
comparison to such deities as the *Maruts* and the *Rudrāṅgirases*.—The
mention of the *Sādhyas* is meant to include all those deities that have
no connection with sacrificial offerings, such, for instance, as *Veno*,
(?) *Sunīti* (?) and so forth.

*\[Another explanation of the verse.\]*

Some people construe ‘*Karmātmanām-devānām-prāṇimām*’ together, taking
them as co-extensive. The ‘gods’ being called ‘*Karmātmānaḥ*’ in the
sense that *they are of the nature of actions*, actions form the very
essence of their nature; they are so called, because they help in the
accomplishment of sacrificial acts, or because they constitute the most
important factor in the sacrificial act. Among the gods there are some
who arc described in the *Itihāsas*, in connection with sacrifices, as
possessed of distinctive forms; to this class belong the gods, Indra,
Rudra and Viṣṇu; there are others who are gods, not in their own forms,
but only at sacrifices; to this class belong the ‘*Akṣa*’ (wheel-axle),
‘*Grāvan*’ (Pebbles) and the *Rathāṅga* (the wheels, or the constituent
parts of the chariot). As regards Indra &c., we find in the
*Mahābhārata* descriptions of such deeds of theirs as fighting with
Vṛttra and other *Asuras*; but there is no description of any such acts
in connection with the Wheel-axle &c.; and yet in the Vedic hymns
connected with sacrificial offerings we find these latter spoken of as
‘deities’; for instance, the *wheel-axles* are referred to as deities in
the hymn ‘*prāvepāmā* &c’; (*Ṛgveda*, 10.34.1); the *Pebbles* are spoken
of as deities in the hymn ‘*praite vadantu* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda*, 10.94.1)—the
Wheels are spoken of as deities in the hymn ‘*vanaspate vīdvaṅgu* *&c*.’
(Ṛgveda 6.47.26).—It is in view of (with a view to exclude) these latter
(which are inanimate) that we have the epithet ‘*prāṇinām*’ (Animate).
There are two kinds of gods; some are animate, others inanimate; *e.g*.,
Indra and others are described in the ‘*Purāṇa*’ as having human bodies
and endowed with life; but the *wheel-axle* &c. are not found so
described. All this conception of the creation of things is based upon
*Itihāsas*. An additional ‘*ca*,’ also, has to be taken as understood;
the meaning being ‘animate and *also* the inanimate.’ According to the
*Nirukta* also there are three kinds of deities—*Horses*, mentioned in
the hymn ‘*mā no mitra* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda*, 1.162.1), *Birds* mentioned in
the hymn ‘*Kanikradat* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda* 5.83.1), and *Bulls* mentioned in
the hymn ‘*āgāvo agman*’ &c. (*Ṛgveda*, 6.28.1);—all these deities are
*animate*; and the *inanimate ones* have been already described.

The epithet ‘*eternal*’ qualifies the ‘*sacrifice*’; the sacrifice
having existed in the previous cycle also, there is a continuity of
tradition in regard to it; and it is on this ground that it is regarded
as *eternal*.—(22)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The meaning of this verse, which Buhler attributes to Medhātithi, is one
that the latter has not put forward at all. His explanation is somewhat
different, as will be clear from the translation. He has however noted
an explanation by ‘others’, which is rightly rendered by Buhler as—‘The
Lord created the multitude of the gods whose nature is sacrifice and of
those endowed with life.’—According to Rāghavānanda it means—‘The Lord
created among beings endowed with life the (to us) invisible multitude
of the gods who, by the result of their acts, have obtained their divine
station, or who subsist on offerings.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

022	He, the Lord, also created the class of the gods, who are endowed with life, and whose nature is action; and the subtile class of the Sadhyas, and the eternal sacrifice.
</details>
