+++
title = "023 अग्नि-वायु-रविभ्यस् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From out of (the three deities) Agni, Vāyu and Ravi, he extracted, for the due fulfilment of sacrifices, the eternal Brahman, threefold, in the forms of ‘Ṛk,’ ‘Yajuṣ’ and ‘Sāman.’—(23)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"तिस्र एव देवताः" अग्निप्रभृतय इति नैरुक्ताः (निर् ७.५), सत्य् अप्य् अभिधाननानात्वे । अतस् तेन दर्शनेनोच्यते । एताभ्यस् तिसृभ्यो यज्ञसिद्ध्यर्थम् । यागसंप्रदानत्वात् तासां चतुर्थी । **त्रयम्** **ऋग्यजुःसामलक्षणं** **ब्रह्म** वेदाख्यं **दुदोह** । द्विकर्मको ऽयं धातुः । प्रधानं कर्म त्रयम् । अप्रधानेन द्वितीयेन कर्मणा भवितव्यम् । न च तद् अस्ति । अतः पञ्चम्य् एवेयम् इति मन्यामहे । अग्न्यादिभ्यो दुदोह, अक्षारयद् अभावयत् । 

- <u>कथं</u> पुनर् अग्न्यादिभ्यो वर्णात्मा शब्दो मन्त्रवाक्यानि ब्राह्मणवाक्यानि च भवेयुः । 

- <u>किं</u> नोपपद्यते । कः शक्तीर् अदृष्टा असतीर् वक्तुम् अर्हति । 

- <u>नाख्यातार्थो</u> विकल्पयितुं युक्तः । पञ्चमी तर्हि किमर्था[^६१] । "दुहियाचि" इति द्वितीयया भवितव्यम् । किं च दृष्टप्रमाणविरोधी प्राग्वृत्तो ऽर्थ उच्यमानो न[^६२] मनःपरितोषम्[^६३] आधत्ते प्रामाणिकानाम् । 


[^६३]:
     M G: manasaḥ paritoṣam


[^६२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: na


[^६१]:
     M G J: kimartham (I follow DK 5:88)

- <u>परिहृतो</u> विरोधः स्वरूपपरत्वाश्रयणेनैषाम् आगमानाम् "ऋग्वेद एवाग्नेर् अजायत, यजुर्वेदो वायोः, सामवेद आदित्यात्" (ऐत्ब् २५.७) इति । अग्न्यादयो ऽपि देवता ऐश्वर्यभाजो निरतिशयशक्तिश् च प्रजापतिः, तत्र का नामानुपपत्तिः । अस्मिन् दर्शने पञ्चम्य् अपि विवक्ष्या । अतः कारकाणि कथितानि यत्रापादनसंज्ञेत्य्[^६४] अपादानविवक्षायां भाष्ये समर्थितानि (पत् ओन् पाण् १.४.५१) । 


[^६४]:
     M G J: kathitāny atrāpādana- (I follow DK 5.88)

- <u>अन्यदर्शने</u> कथम् । 

- <u>चतुर्थी</u> तावद् युक्तैव । अर्थवादाश् चैते । तत्र द्वितीयं कर्म आत्मैव "प्रजापतिर् आत्मानं दुदोह" । दोहनं चाध्यापनं परसंक्रान्तिसामान्येन । 

- अथापि पञ्चमी । तत्राप्य् आग्नेया मन्त्रा आदाव् ऋग्वेदे, अतः "अग्नेर् अजायत" (ऐत्ब् ५.३२) इत्य् उच्यते, यजुर्वेदे ऽपि "इषे त्वोर्जे त्वा" (त्स् १.१.१) इति । इड् अन्नम्, तन् मध्यस्थानत्वाद्[^६५] वायुना वर्षदानेन क्रियते । ऊर्क् प्राणः, स वायुर् एव । अत आदितो वायुकार्यसंबन्धाद् वायोर् इत्य् उपमा । अथ वा, आध्वर्यवम् आर्त्व्ज्यं बहुप्रकाराश् चेष्टाश् च सर्वा वायोर् इत्य् अनेन सामान्येन वायोर् जन्म यजुर्वेदस्य । अनधिकारस्य सामगीत्ययोग्यत्वाद् उत्तमाध्ययनानि सामानि, उत्तमस्थानश् चादित्य इति ॥ २३ ॥


[^६५]:
     J: tat ma vyasthānatvād
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

There are only three deities, Agni, Vāyu, and Ravi,—say the followers of
the Nirukta; even though these three have several names; and in
accordance with this theory the text would mean as follows:—‘*For the
due fulfilment of the sacrifices*,’ *to these three deities*,—the Dative
ending (in the term ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’) being due to the fact of
these three deities being the recipients of the sacrificial
offerings,—‘*he milked the Brahman*,’ called ‘Veda’, ‘*in the forms of
Ṛk, Yajuṣ and* *Sāman*.’

But as a matter of fact, the root (in ‘*dudoha*’ ‘milked’) is one that
should have two objects; it has its primary object in the form of
‘*trayam*’; and it should have a second, the secondary, object; but
there is no such secondary object in the sentence. Hence we conclude
that the term ‘*ravibhyaḥ*’ should be taken in the Ablative case; the
meaning being—‘*From out of the three deities, Agni &c, he
extracted*’—made to flow, produced—\[the Veda\].

*Question*:—“How could the words, the mantra-texts and the
Brāhmaṇa-texts (of which the Veda consists)—which are made up of
letters—come out of Agni and other deities?” *Answer*:—Why is this not
possible? In regard to invisible forces, who can say that they do not
exist?

\[An objection is raised against the second interpretation preferred by
the Bhāṣya\]—“It is not right to alter the meaning of the verb
(‘*dundoha*,’ ‘milked’); so that (if the root retains its own meaning)
how could we havo the Ablative (in ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’)? It should
take the Accusative ending, according to the grammatical rule under
Pāṇini’s Sūtra 1.4.51, which lays down that the roots ‘*duhi*,’ ‘*yāci*’
&c., take two objects, and the source from which the ‘milking’ is done
is the secondary object. Further, the mind of reasonable men is not
satisfied when what is described as having happened in the past is
something that is not compatible with the ordinary sources of
knowledge.”

This incongruity becomes explained away when we take the statement as
referring to the framework of the Vedas; the meaning being that the
*Ṛgveda* came out of Agni, the *Yajurveda* out of Vāyu and the
*Sāmaveda* out of Ravi. Then again, it has to be borne in mind that Agni
and the rest are *deities* endowed with superior potencies, and
Prajāpati is possessed of unexcelled powers; so that what can be
impossible for these? Under this explanation full significance should
attach to the Ablative; so that the case-relation being already
expressed (by the Ablative), and the Ablative being duly significant, it
is the Ablative that is used \[and not the Accusative, which has been
laid down in Pāṇini 1.4.51 as to be used only in cases where the
case-relation is *not* otherwise expressed\]; this has been fully
justified in the Bhāṣya (of Patañjali).

*Question*:—“If the said theory be not accepted, what would be the
explanation of the word ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’ then?”

*Answer*:—In that case, we have already said that it could be taken as
the Dative; and (as regards the necessity of the verb ‘*dudoha*,’
‘milked,’ having a secondary object) it has to be borne in mind that all
that is here stated is mere *vāda*. So that (physical impossibilities
being not counted) ‘*ātman*’ may be taken as the required secondary
object,—the meaning being that ‘Prajāpati milked himself (of the Veda)’
\[‘*for* *the sake of Agni, and Ravi*’\]. And further, ‘milking’ may be
taken in the sense of *teaching*, which resembles the act of *milking*
in consisting of *transferring a thing from one receptacle into
another*. \[So that the passage would mean that ‘he taught the Veda to
Agni &c.’\] Even when the word ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’ is taken as
Ablative, the statement can be justified on the ground that the opening
verses of the *Ṛgveda* speak of Agni,—this fact being what is meant by
the statement ‘the Ṛgveda came out of Agni.’ Similarly, the opening
verse of the Yajurveda is ‘*Iṣe tvorje*’ &c., whore the term ‘*iṭ*’ (the
base in ‘*iṣe*’) means *food*, and food is produced by Vāyu, which is
present within the food, by the bestowing (upon it) of rain; ‘*urk*’
(the base in the second word ‘*urje*’) means *life-breath*, and this is
*Vāyu* (Air) itself; thus since the Yajurveda opens with the description
of the effects of *Vāyu*, we have the metaphorical expression that ‘it
came *out of Vāyu*.’ Or, the duties of the *Adhvaryu* and the functions
of the *Ṛtviks* (which form the subject-matter of the *Yajurveda*) all
consist of so many forms of activity; and all activity proceeds from
*Vāyu*; hence it is on the basis of this similarity that the Yajurveda
is spoken of as *coming out of Vāyu*. Lastly, as regards the the singing
of the Sāman cannot be done except by persons specially qualified for
it; hence the *Sāma* *verses* are such as can be duly read by only the
best among men, and Ravi (the Sun) occupies the highest point in space
\[and on this fact is based the statement that the *Sāmaveda* came out
of *Ravi* \].—(23)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

There are two explanations of this verse, supplied by Medhātithi:—(1)
‘For the sake of the accomplishment of the sacrifice to Agni, Vāyu and
Sūrya, He produced the Veda,’ and (2) ‘Out of Agni......He produced the
Veda’;—the latter being preferred, for reasons adduced in the *Bhāṣya*.

Burnell has a curious note here to the effect that—‘This myth of the
creation of the Vedas differs from the Sāṅkhya account, *according to
which they are eternal and issue from Brahmā’s mouth*.’ It was necessary
to supply references to the work on Sāṅkhya here referred to.

*Medhātithi* (p. 19, 1. 9) ‘*Asmindarśane*’—etc. This refers to the
passage in the *Mahāhhāṣya* (Nirṇayasāgara edition, ‘Vol. II, p. 265, l.
18).

A similar use of the Ablative ending we find in 2. 77.

Do. (p. 19, l. 11) ‘*Dohanañchādhyāpanam*’—In this case *ravibhyaḥ*
would be the *Dative* form.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

023	But from fire, wind, and the sun he drew forth the threefold eternal Veda, called Rik, Yagus, and Saman, for the due performance of the sacrifice.
</details>
