+++
title = "026 कर्मणाञ् च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the due discrimination of actions, he differentiated Virtue and Vice; and he connected these creatures with such pairs of opposites as Pleasure-Pain and the like.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**धर्माधर्मौ व्यवेचयत्** विवेकेन पृथग्भावेन व्यवस्थापितवान्- "अयं धर्म एव, अयम् अधर्म एव" ।

- <u>ननु</u> च नैवायं विवेको ऽस्ति । सन्ति हि कर्माण्य् उभयरूपाणि धर्माधर्मात्मकानि । यथाहुः- "शबलानि वैदिकानि कर्माणि, हिंसासाधनकत्वात् । यथा ज्योतिष्टोमः स्वरूपेण धर्मो हिंसाङ्गत्वात् त्व् अधर्मः" इति ।

- <u>अत आह</u> **कर्मणां तु विवेकाय** । कर्मशब्देनात्र प्रोयोगः कर्मणाम् अनुष्ठानम् उच्यते । स एव पदार्थो ऽन्यथा प्रयुज्यमानो विपरीतस्वभावो भवति । धर्मः सन्न् अधर्मरूपताम् आपद्यते, अधर्मो धर्मत्वम् । तथा हिंसैव । हिंसा बहिःप्रयुज्यमाना अधर्मः सः, "न हिंस्यात् सर्वभूतानि" इति प्रतिषेधगोचरत्वात् । अन्तर्वेदिकृता अग्नीषोमीये धर्मः, विधिलक्षणत्वात् । एवं तपो[^६६] धर्मः, तद् एव तु दम्भेनासामर्थ्यादिना[^६७] वा क्रियमाणम् अधर्मः । एवं देवरगमनं स्त्रीणाम् अधर्मः, गुरुनियुक्तानां पुत्रार्थिनीनां घृताक्ताद्यनुग्रहेण धर्मः । अतः स्वरूपैकत्वे ऽपि प्रयोगभेदाद् धर्माधर्मव्यवस्था । एकत्वे ऽपि[^६८] प्रमाणान्तरदृष्ट्या[^६९] स्वरूपभेद एव ।


[^६९]:
M G add: tu


[^६८]:
M G 1st ed.: ekatvaṃ ca


[^६७]:
M G 1st ed: -nāsamartho na


[^६६]:
M G 1st ed: tayor; G 2nd ed: tapor

- अथ च कर्मफलेषु कर्मशब्दः, कारणे कार्योपचारात्[^७०] । तेनैतद् उक्तं भवति- कर्माणि **व्यवेचयत्** कर्मफलविभागाय । कः पुनः कर्मणां फलविभागः । अत उक्तम्- **द्वन्द्वैर् अयोजयत् सुखदुःखादिभिः** । धर्मस्य फलं सुखम् अधर्मस्य दुःखम् । अत उभयकारिणो द्वन्द्वैर् योज्यन्ते, धर्मकारित्वात् सुखेन, अधर्मकारित्वाद् दुःखेन । **द्वन्द्व**शब्दो ऽयं रूढ्या परस्परविरुद्धेषु पीडाकरेषु वर्तते शीतोष्णवृष्ट्यातपक्षुत्सौहित्यादिषु । **आदि**ग्रहणं सामान्यविशेषभावेन ज्ञेयम् । केवलौ सुखदुःखशब्दौ स्वर्गनरकयोर् वाचकौ निरतिशयानन्दपरितापवचनौ वा । विशेषः[^७१] स्वर्गग्रामपुत्रपश्वादिलाभस् तदपहारश् चादिशब्दस्य विषयः । कर्मणां पूर्वम् उत्पत्तिर् उक्ता । अनेन तेषाम् एव प्रयोगविभागः फलविभागश् च प्रजापतिना कृत इति प्रतिपाद्यविवेकः ॥ १.२६ ॥


[^७१]:
M G: viśeṣa


[^७०]:
D (5: 601) suggests: kārye kāraṇopacārāt
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He differentiated Virtue and Vice*’—He fixed their character by due
distinction, *i.e*., as distinct from each other; in such form—‘this is
*Virtue*, that is *Vice*.’

*Objection*:—“In reality however, there is no such hard and fast
distinction; there are several actions that partake of the nature of
both and are both *virtuous* and *vicious* (sinful); for instance, they
say that the actions (of sacrifice) laid down in the Veda are of mixed
character, being accomplished, as they are, by means of
animal-slaughter; the sacrifice for instance, is by itself a *virtuous*
or meritorious act, but by reason of animal-slaughter forming one of its
factors, it is *vicious* or sinful.”

It is in view of this objection that the text has added the phrase—‘*For
the due discrimination of actions*’;—the term ‘action’ here stands for
the actual process, the performance of actions; as a matter of fact, the
same *act*, if *performed* in a different manner, acquires an entirely
different character; *i.e*., an act which is *virtuous* (when done in
one way) becomes *vicious* (when done in another way), and *vice versâ*;
*e.g*. the act of animal-slaughter itself; animal-slaughter, when done
apart from a sacrificial performance, is *vicious*, sinful,—forming as
it does the subject of such Vedic prohibitions as ‘One should not kill
any animals’; but when done within the sacrificial altar, during the
*Agnīṣomīya* offering, *it in virtous*, meritorious—being an act that
forms the subject of injunctions. Similarly, Austerity (in itself) is
*virtuous*; but when it is performed through hypocrisy, or by a person
unfit for performing it, it is *vicious*. Similarly again, for women,
intercourse with the husband’s younger brother is *sinful*; but when
under orders from her elders, a woman desiring children has intercourse
with her brother-in-law, who is besmeared with clarified butter &c. (as
laid down in the scriptures), it is *virtuous*. Thus then, even though
the action be one and the same, there is a distinction based upon the
way in which it is actually performed. The sameness of the action
however is only apparent; in view of other sources of knowledge the acts
(done in different ways) are different.

Further, the term ‘*action*’ may be taken as standing for the *effects*
of the actions,—the cause being figuratively spoken of as the effect.
Thus the meaning comes to be as follows:—‘He differentiated actions for
the due discrimination of the *effects of actions*.’

In view of the question as to what is the ‘discrimination of the effects
of actions,’ it is added—‘*he connected them with pairs of opposites, in
the shape of Plensure-Pain and the like*’;—‘Pleasure’ being the effect
of ‘Virtue’ and ‘Pain’ of ‘Vice.’ It is thus that people performing both
kind of actions become associated with these pairs of opposites; by
performing virtuous acts they become associated with pleasure, and by
performing vicious acts they become connected with pain.

The term ‘*dvanḍva*’, ‘*Pair of opposites*,’ is, by usage, applied to
such mutually contradictory sources of pain as ‘Heat-Cold,’ ‘Rain-Hot
weather,’ ‘Hunger-Satiation,’ and so forth.

The phrase ‘*and the like*’ refers to the general and special forms of
the said sources of pain. For instance, the terms ‘Pleasure-Pain,’ in
their general form are denotative either of ‘Heaven-Hell,’ or of
‘excessive joy and sorrow’; while in their special form, they stand for
the ‘obtaining of heaven, of landed property, of sons, of cattle and so
forth (‘*Pleasure*’) and the ‘being deprived of these’; all these being
implied by the terms ‘*Ādi*,’ ‘*and the like*.’

The creation of Actions having been described before (in Verse 18 *et
seq*.), what is described in the present verse is that Prajāpati brought
about the distinction in their actual performance, as also the
discrimination of their effects; thus there is a difference between what
was said before and what is said now.—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The term ‘*dharma*’, as Burnell rightly remarks, stands for a man’s
whole duty, including both secular and religious duty.’

The other ‘*Dvandvas*’ are *Kāma* (Desire)—*Krodha* (Anger)—*Rāga*
(Attachment)—*Dveṣa* (Hatred)—‘*Kṣut* (Hunger) —*Pipāsā*
(Thirst)—*Harṣa* (joy)—*Viṣāda* (Sorrow)’ and so forth.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	Moreover, in order to distinguish actions, he separated merit from demerit, and he caused the creatures to be affected by the pairs (of opposites), such as pain and pleasure.
</details>
