+++
title = "031 लोकानान् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With a view to the development of the (three) regions, He brought into existence the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya and the Śūdra, from out of His mouth, arms, thighs and feet (respectively).—(31)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पृथिव्यादीनां **लोकानां** **विवृद्ध्यर्थम्** । वृद्धिः पुष्टिर् बाहुल्यं वा । ब्राह्मणादिषु चतुर्षु वर्णेषु सत्सु त्रयाणां लोकानां वृद्धिः । "इतः प्रदानं देवा उपजीवन्ति" (त्स् ३.२.९.७) । ते च यागाद्यधिकृताः । अतस् तैः कर्म कृतम् उभौ लोकौ वर्धयति । पुरुषकर्मप्रचोदिता देवाः । "आदित्याज् जायते वृष्टिः" (म्ध् ३.६६ [७६]) इति, अस्यापि लोकस्य वृष्टिर्[^७७] वृद्धिः । ब्राह्मणादीन् वर्णान् **निरवर्तयन्** निर्वर्तितवान् असृजत् । **मुखबाहूरुपादतः**, यथाक्रमं मुखाद् ब्राह्मणम्, बाहुभ्यां राजन्यम्, ऊरुभ्यां वैश्यम्, शूद्रं पादत इति । तसिः अपादाने (पाण् ५.४.४५) । कारणात् कार्यं निष्कृष्यत इवेति भवति[^७८] । अपाये सति अपादानत्वम् । आद्यं कंचिद् ब्राह्मणं स्वमुखावयवेभ्यो[^७९] दैव्या शक्त्या निर्मितवान्, अद्यतनानां सर्वेषां मिथुनसंप्रयोगद्वारेण तत्त्वेभ्य[^८०] उत्पत्तिदर्शनात् । परमार्थतः स्तुतिर् एषा वर्णानाम् उत्कर्षापकर्षप्रदर्शनार्थम् । सर्वेषां भूतानां प्रजापतिः श्रेष्ठस् । तस्यापि सर्वेषाम् अङ्गानां मुखम् । ब्राह्मणो ऽपि सर्वेषां वर्णानां प्रशस्यतमः । एतेन सामान्येन ब्रह्ममुखाद् उत्पन्न इत्य् उच्यते । मुखकर्माध्यापनाद्यतिशयाद् वा मुखत इत्य् उच्यते । क्षत्रियस्यापि बाहुकर्म युद्धम् । वैश्यस्याप्य् ऊरुकर्म पशून्[^८१] रक्षतो गोभिश् चरन्तीभिर् भ्रमणम्, स्थलपथवारिपथादिषु वाणिज्यायै गमनम् । शूद्रस्य पादकर्म शुश्रूषा ॥ १.३१ ॥


[^८१]:
     M G 1st ed.: paśurūpaṃ


[^८०]:
     DK (5: 1153): tattebhya 


[^७९]:
     DK (5: 1153) suggests: brāhmaṇādiṃ svamukhādyavayavebhyo


[^७८]:
     DK (5: 1153): bhāti


[^७७]:
     M G J: sṛṣṭir (I follow the suggestion of DK 5: 1153)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*With a view to the development of the regions*.’ terrestrial and the
rest;—‘*development*’ stands for *Nourishment* and *expansion*; it is
only when the four castes, Brāhmaṇa and the rest, are there that there
is development of the three regions; for the Gods live upon offerings
made by these castes,—these castes alone being entitled to the
performance of sacrifices; so that the action done by these nourishes
the two regions (celestial and subterranean); then again, the Gods also
are prompted by men’s action to act; from the Sun-God comes rain; and
thus the said creation (of the Brāhmaṇa) tends to the nourishment of
this (terrestrial) region also.

‘*He brought unto existence*,’—*i.e*., produced, the Brāhmaṇa and other
castes,—‘*from out of his mouth, arm*’, *thighs and feet*’ respectively;
*i.e*., the Brāhmaṇa from out of his mouth, the Kṣatriya out of his
arms, the Vaiśya out of his thighs and the Śūdra out of his feet.—The
affix ‘*tasi*’ (*in* ‘*mukha* *bāhārupādataḥ*’) has the sense of the
Ablative; the effect is, as it were, drawn out of the cause; and this
implying a sort of *separation*, the use of the Ablative becomes fully
justified.

It was only a certain primeval Brāhmaṇa whom Prajāpati produced, by his
divine power, out of the component particles of his own mouth; because
so far as the Brāhmaṇas of the present day are concerned, they are all
actually found to he produced by intercourse between human couples, out
of the material principles.

In reality however, what is stated here is merely commendatory, intended
to show the relative superiority and inferiority of the castes;—the
meaning being—‘of all beings Prajāpati is the highest,—among all the
limbs of Prajāpati, the mouth is the highest,—similarly the Brāhmaṇa is
the highest, most praiseworthy, of all the castes;’ and on the basis of
this similarity the Brāhmaṇa is described as produced out of Brahma’s
mouth.

Or, the description of the Brāhmaṇa coming out of Brahma’s mouth may be
due to the fact that the work of the mouth, such as teaching and the
like, belongs preeminently to the Brāhmaṇa; to the Kṣatriya belongs the
work of the arms, lighting; to the Vaiśya the work of the thighs, such
as wandering about with the cows, when tending cattle, and also
travelling for trade on land and water; and to the Śūdra belongs the
work of the feet, *i.e*., service.—(31)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Lokavivṛddhyartham*’—‘in order that the inhabitants of the worlds
might *multiply* (or *prosper*)’—(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Kullūka);—‘in order to protect the world by means of the castes, and to
make it prosperous’ (Nārāyaṇa).

It is refreshing to find Medhātithi regarding this account of the castes
issuing from the mouth and other parts of the body of the Lord as mere
‘*stuti*’—not to be taken as literally true.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

031	But for the sake of the prosperity of the worlds he caused the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra to proceed from his mouth, his arms, his thighs, and his feet.
</details>
