+++
title = "054 युगपत् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When this Soul of all things sleeps happy and contented, then all things become absorbed all at once in that Great Soul.—(54)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यत्तदोर् व्यत्ययेनायं श्लोको व्याख्यातव्यः । अन्यथा पूर्वश्लोकापेक्षयेतरेतराश्रयः प्रसज्येत । एतद् उक्तम् । यदा स्वपिति तदा निमीलति सर्वम् ।

**सुखं स्वपिति निर्वृतः** । सुखस्वरूपम् एव परं ब्रह्म, न तस्य स्वापावस्थायां सुखम् अन्यदा दुःखम् । स्वापश् च तस्य यादृशः स प्राग् उक्त एव । निर्वृतिश् च तस्य सर्वकालम् । न ह्य् असौ परमात्माविद्योपप्लवतरङ्गैर् आमृश्यते, केवलसुखमयः । तस्य सर्वस्य कर्तृत्वं उपपद्यते । यथायं पुरुष उपरतो गृहकृत्येभ्यः कृतकृत्यतयार्जितं मया धनं गृहोपयोगि निरुपद्रवश् चास्मि संवृत्त इत्य् एवं सुखं स्वपिति निर्वृत्तो निराशङ्कात्मबाध एवम् उपमीयते ऽसाव् अपि । तस्यापीदं जगत् कुटुम्बभूतम् इति प्रशंसा ।

- प्रधानविषयो वायं श्लोको वर्णनीयः । तदा प्रधानं स्वपिति यदा युगपत् सर्वाणि भूतानि तत्र प्रलीयन्ते तदात्मतां कारणरूपताम् आपद्यन्ते विकारावस्थाम् उद्गच्छन्ति[^९५] युगपद् यावन्ति त्रैलोक्योदरवर्तीनि । स्वापश् च परिणामनिवृत्तिर् न पुनर् ज्ञानोपसंहतिः अचेतनस्य प्रधानस्य । सुखं चोपचारतो ऽचेतनत्वाद् एव ॥ १.५४ ॥


[^९५]:
J: ujjhanti
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse has to he explained by reversing the position of ‘when’ and
‘then’; otherwise, from what has been said in the foregoing verses,
there would be mutual interdependence: it has been stated (in Verse 52)
that *when He sleeps then all things vanish* \[and if the persent verse
is taken to mean, as the words suggest, that when the things vanish into
the Great Soul, then this Great Soul retires to sleep, then we would
have the vanishing of things dependent upon his going to sleep, as
stated in 52, and his going to sleep dependent upon the vanishing of
things, as stated in 54\].

‘*Sleeps happy and contented*,’—Happiness forms the very nature of the
Supreme Brahman; hence it is not meant that He is happy during sleep and
unhappy at other times;—of what nature his ‘*sleep*’ is has already been
explained;—as regards his ‘*contentment*,’ that is everlasting;
consisting of pure bliss, this Supreme Soul is never affected by the
waves of agitation that are set up in Nescience. Though (even with all
this) it is possible for him to be the *Creator* of all things. In the
ordinary world, a man retires from his household duties after having
done that he had to do,—with the feeling, ‘I have earned all the wealth
that was necessary for my family; I am free from troubles,’—and thus
sleeps in happiness and contentment, without fearing any trouble to
himself. To such a person is the Supreme Soul compared; this whole world
being in the position of ‘family’ to him;—this being intended as his
praise.

Or \[in order to avoid the necessity of having to reverse the order of
the words\] the verse may be taken as referring to Primordial Matter:
When Primordial Matter sleeps, then all things become absorbed into it
all at once; that is, they become resolved into the form of Primordial
Matter, being reduced to the position of their cause; that is, they are
reduced to a ‘condition in which they cease to undergo
modifications.’—‘*All at once*,’ all things contained in the womb of the
three regions.—The ‘*sleep*’ of Primordial Matter, which is devoid of
consciousness, can mean only *cessation of evolution*, and not
*inhibition of consciousness*;—‘*happiness*’ also is only figurative,
for the same reason that Matter is devoid of consciousness.—(54)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Govindarāja and Kullūka make this out to be the description of the
*Mahā-pralaya*, and the preceding verse of. the
Intermediate—*Khaṇḍa*—*pralaya*.

*Sarvabhūtātmā*—stands for the Sāṅkhya ‘*Pradhāna*’;—according to the
second explanation put forward by Medhātithi;—according to the other
explanation, accepted by Govindarāja and Kullūka, the term stands for
the Supreme Self of the Vedānta.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

054	When they are absorbed all at once in that great soul, then he who is the soul of all beings sweetly slumbers, free from all care and occupation.
</details>
