+++
title = "055 तमो ऽयम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This (individual Soul), on entering into ‘Darkness,’ remains, for a long time, equipped with the sense-organs, but does not perform its functions; then it departs from the body.—(55)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इदानीं संसारिणः पुरुषस्य मरणं देहान्तरप्राप्तिश् चाभ्यां श्लोकाभ्यां कथ्यते । **तमो** ज्ञाननिवृत्तिस् तां **समाश्रित्य** **चिरं तिष्ठत्य्** आस्ते **सेन्द्रियः** । **न च स्वं कुरुते कर्म** श्वासप्रश्वासादिकं । **तदा मूर्तितः** शरीराद् **उत्क्रामति** गच्छति ।

- <u>ननु</u> च सर्वगत आत्माकाशवद् विभुस् तस्य कीदृश्य् उत्क्रान्तिः । 

- कर्मोपार्जितशरीरत्याग एवोत्क्रान्तिः । न पुनर् मूर्तस्यैवार्थस्य देशाद् देशान्तरगमनम् । <u>अथ</u> वा कैश्चिद् इष्यते- अस्त्य् अन्यद् अन्तराभवं शरीरं सूक्ष्मं यस्येयम् उत्क्रान्तिः । <u>अन्यैस्</u> त्व् अन्तराभवदेहो नेष्यते । यथाह भगवान् व्यासः-

- अस्मिन् देहे व्यतीते तु देहम् अन्यन् नराधिप ।

- इन्द्रियाणि वसन्त्य् एव तस्मान् नास्त्य् अन्त्राभवः ॥

<u>सांख्या</u> अपि केचिन् नान्तराभवम् इच्छन्ति विन्ध्यवासिप्रभृतयः । को ऽयम् अन्तराभवो नाम । अस्मिञ् छरीरे नष्टे मातृकुक्ष्यादिस्थानं द्वितीयशरीरग्रहणार्थं यावन् न प्राप्तं तावद् अन्तरा निरुपभोगं[^९६] शरीरम् उपजायते सूक्ष्मं यस्य न क्वचित् संयोगो नाग्न्यादिदाहो न महाभूतैः प्रतिबन्धः । <u>अन्ये</u> तु मूर्तिं परमात्मानम् आहुः । सर्वात्मरूपः परमात्मा समुद्रस्थानीयस् ततः प्रादुर् भवन्ति जीवा अविद्यावशाद् भेदम् उपयन्ति, महोदधेर् इवोर्मयः । तस्य च ततो निष्क्रामतः पुर्यष्टाकाख्यं लिङ्गम् अभ्युपगम्यते । धर्माधर्मपूर्वकृतवशात्[^९७] प्रत्येकस्य जीवस्य वासःस्थानीयं सूक्ष्मं शरीरम् । यथा पुराण उक्तम् । 


[^९७]:
     J: pūrvakṛtadharmādharmavaśāt


[^९६]:
     M G 1st ed.: nirupayogi; G 2nd ed.: nirupabhogayogi

- पुर्यष्टकेन लिङ्गेन प्राणाख्येन स युज्यते ।

- तेन बद्धस्य वै बन्धो मोक्षो मुक्तस्य तेन तु ॥

ते च प्राणापानव्यानोदानसमानाः पञ्च बुद्धीन्द्रियवर्ग एवं कर्मेन्द्रियवर्गो ऽष्टमं मन इत्य् एतत् पुर्यष्टकम् । तच्छरीरं न नश्यति आमोक्षावस्थायाः । तद् उक्तम् "संसरति निरूपभोगभावैर्[^९८] अधिवासितं लिङ्गम्" ॥ १.५५ ॥


[^९८]:
     J: nirūpabhogaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Now by means of these two verses the author is going to describe the
dying and the obtaining of another body by the Soul fallen in the cycle
of births and deaths.

‘*Darkness*’—stands for cessation of consciousness (preceding
death);—*entering into*, falling into, this unconsciousness *it remains
for a long time, equipped with the sense-organs; but does not perform
its functions*— of breathing in and out; *then it departs*—goes
out—*from the body*, the corporeal frame.

*Question*:—“As a matter of fact, the Soul is omnipresent, and
all-pervading like *Ākāśa*; so that what kind of ‘*departure*’ is it
that occurs in its case?”

*Answer*,—‘*Departure*’ means only the renouncing of the body that had
been obtained as the result of past acts; and it does not mean that, it
goes from one place to another, like a material object.—Or, the answer
may be, as held by some people, that the ‘*departure*’ spoken of is that
of another and a more subtle body which comes into existence in between
(the two bodies). But this intermediate body is not admitted by others;
as for instance, it has been declared by the revered Vyāsa—‘This present
body having disappeared, the sense-organs forthwith enter into another
body; so that there is no intermediate body.’ Some followers of the
*Sāṅkhya* such as Vindhyavāsin and the rest, also do not admit of an
intermediate body.

“What is this ‘intermediate body’?”

When this (physical) body has been destroyed, so long as a place in the
womb of the (future) mother is not secured, where the second (physical
body) would be formed, there exists during the interval, a subtle body
entirely devoid of all sensation, which cannot come into contact with
any thing, which is not burnt by fire and which is not obstructed by
elemental substances.

Others explain the ‘*mūrti*’ of the text as the Supreme Self. The
Supreme Self, which is the Soul of all things, is like the Ocean; out of
that emerge the Jīvas (Individual Souls) under the influence of
nescience, just in the same manner as waves emerge from the Ocean; and
when the Individual Soul thus emerges out of the Supreme Soul, it
assumes, by virtue of its past Virtue and Vice, a form known by the name
‘*Puryaṣṭaka*’; and this is the ‘subtle body,’ which serves as the
clothing of the Individual Soul. This has been thus declared in the
Purāṇa—‘He becomes united with the *Puryaṣṭaka-* form, which is known as
Prāṇa (Life); when bound up with this, *he is in bondage*, and when
freed from it, he is *released*.’ The ‘*puryaṣṭaka*,’ ‘*eight-fold*’
frame consists of the five life-breaths,—*Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna*, *Udāna*
and *Vyāna*—the Group consisting of the five organs of sensation, the
Group consisting of the five organs of action, and the Mind as the
eighth. This body is not destroyed, until the condition of Final Release
is attained. This is thus stated (in *Sāṅkhyakārikā* 40)—‘What migrates
is the subtle body, which is devoid of feeling, but invested with
tendencies.’—(55)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Under this verse Hopkins translates a passage from Medhātithi, which, as
will be clear from the text, has been entirely misunderstood and hence
wrongly rendered.

Verses 55 and 56 have been variously interpreted. (1) According to
Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka, it describes the process of
transmigration. When an individual is dying, his individual Soul enters
darkness,—*i.e*. becomes unconscious; and even though It continues to be
connected with the dying body, the physical functions gradually
cease;—then It leaves the body,—and enveloped in a subtle body—formed of
the eight constituents (variously enumerated), It enters the embryo
determined for It by its own past acts, and there becomes clothed with a
new physical body which accompanies It through Its next life on Earth.
(2) Nārāyaṇa holds that verse 55 provides the description of the soul
during a swoon, and the second alone refers to the method of
transmigration. (3) The explanation given by Nandana is entirely
different. He; takes the verses as referring to what is done by the
Supreme Being, the Creator;—verse 55 describing His action during
Dissolution and 56 referring to a fresh creation following it. The
Supreme Lord ‘enters darkness—*i.e*. the *Pradhāna*,—and having remained
therein during the entire period of the Dissolution, becomes endowed
with organs and a visible shape,—*i*. *e*., the shape of the Created
Universe.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

055	When this (soul) has entered darkness, it remains for a long time united with the organs (of sensation), but performs not its functions; it then leaves the corporeal frame.
</details>
