+++
title = "058 इदं शास्त्रम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having prounded this Law, he himself, first of all, taught it to me with due care; I then taught it to Marīci and other Sages.—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इह शास्त्रशब्देन स्मार्तो विधिप्रतिषेधसमूह उच्यते, न तु ग्रन्थः, तस्य मनुना कृतत्वात् । तथा हि मानव इति व्यपदेशो ऽस्य । इतरथा हि हैरण्यगर्भ इति व्यपदिश्येत ।

- <u>केचित्</u> तु हिरण्यगर्भेनापि कृते ग्रन्थे मनुना बहूनां प्रकाशितत्वात् तेन व्यपदेशो युज्यत एव । यथा हिमवति प्रथमम् उपलभ्यमाना गङ्गा, अन्यतो ऽप्य् उत्पन्ना हैमवतीति व्यपदिश्यते, यथा च नित्यं दर्शनात् काठकं प्रवचनं कठेन व्यपदेशः । सत्स्व् अप्य् अन्येष्व् अध्येतृष्व् अध्यापयितृषु च प्रवचनप्रकर्षात् कठेन व्यपदेशः । नारदश् च स्मरति- "शतसाहस्रो ऽयं ग्रन्थः प्रजापतिना कृतस् ततः स मन्वादिभिः क्रमेण संक्षिप्तः" इति । अतो ऽन्यकृतत्वे ऽपि मानवव्यपदेशो न विरुद्धः । शास्त्रशब्देन ग्रन्थाभिधानम् अपि शासनरूपार्थप्रतिपादकत्वाद् दृष्टम् एव । 

- **माम् एव ग्राहयामास,** अहं तेनाध्यापित इत्य् अर्थः । **स्वयम् आदितो विधिवद्** इत्य् एभिः पदैर् आगमस्याविभ्रंश उच्यते । ग्रन्थकारेण हि स्वकृतो ग्रन्थो यः स्वयम् अध्याप्यते प्रथमं तत्र मात्रापि न परिहीयते । अन्यस्य हि तस्माद् अधिगतवतो ऽन्यम् अध्यापयतो न तद्ग्रन्थाविनाशे यत्नो भवति । कर्तुर् अप्य् अध्यापितपूर्वस्य "प्रतिष्ठापितो मया पूर्वम् अयं ग्रन्थः" इति द्वितीयवारं प्रमादालस्यादिना भ्रंशः संभाव्यते । अत **आदित** इत्य् उक्तम् । विधिवच् छिष्योपाध्याययोर् अनन्यमनस्कतादिगुणो ऽवहितचित्तता विधिः । अर्हे वतिः (च्ड़्। पाण् ५.१.११७) ।

- **मरीच्यादींस् त्व् अहं मुनीन्** । मरीच्यादयः प्रसिद्धप्रभावाः, तैर् अप्य् एतन् मत्सकाशाद् अधितम् इत्य् आत्मनो विशिष्टशिष्यसंबन्धेन सिद्धम् औपाध्यायिकं[^९९] दर्शयन् महर्षीणां शास्त्रमाहात्म्येन च श्रद्धातिशयं जनयत्य् अध्ययनाविरामाय । एवंविधम् एतन् महच् छास्त्रं यन् मरीच्यादिभिर् अप्य् अधीतम् । एष चेदृशो महात्मा मनुस् तेषाम् उपाध्याय इति युक्तम् एतस्य सकाशाद् एतद्ग्रन्थाध्ययनम् इत्य् आ शास्त्रपरिसमाप्तेर् नोपरमन्ते श्रोतार इत्य् उभयथापि शास्त्रप्रशंसा ॥ १.५८ ॥


[^९९]:
     DK (5: 89) suggests: aupādhyāyakaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the present context the term ‘Law’ stands for *the whole collection
of Injunctions and Prohibitions contained in the Smṛtis*, and not for
any particular *treatise*; as this latter was composed by Manu; that is
why the Treatise is called ‘Mānava’ (of Manu); otherwise \[ *i.e*., if
the Treatise were the ‘Law’ propounded by the Imperishable One\], it
would have been ‘*Hairaṇyagarbha*,’ ‘of Hiraṇyagarbha.’

Others however have held that the Treatise itself was composed by
Hiraṇyagarbha \[and is spoken of in the text as the ‘Law’ propounded by
him\], and since it came to be revealed to, and published among, many
persons by *Manu*, it is only right that it should he called after the
name of the latter. For instance, the Ganga has its real source
somewhere else (in Heaven), and yet since it is seen for the first time
in the Himavat (Himālaya), it is called ‘*Haimavatī*’ (proceeding from
Himavat), after the name of the latter;—similarly though the Vedic text
is eternal, yet since it was expounded by Kaṭha, it is called
‘*Kāṭhaka*,’ after his name; even though there are several other
expounders and learners of that Veda, yet it is called after Kaṭha, on
account of the superiority of his expounding. Nārada also has declared
thus:—‘This Treatise, consisting of 100,000 verses, was composed by
Prajāpati, and, in due course, it came to be abridged by Manu and
others.’ Thus, even though the Treatise may have been originally
composed by some one else, there is nothing incongruous in its being
called ‘Mānava,’ ‘of Manu.’ As for the term ‘*Śāstra*,’ ‘*Law*’ (of the
text) standing for the *Treatise*, we often find it so used, in the
sense that the subject expounded by it is *instruction*, ‘*śāṣana*.’

‘*He taught it to me*,’ I was taught by him.—‘*Himself*,’ ‘*first of
all*,’ ‘*with care*,’—these words indicate the fact that there was no
break in the continuity of tradition in regard to the Law. As a matter
of fact, when the author of a book ‘*himself*’ teaches it first of all,
not a single syllable of it is lost; while when the book composed by one
person is taught by another person who has learnt it from the former,
there is not the same ‘*care*’ taken in guarding the text from loss. In
fact, in the case of the author himself, when he has taught it once and
established its position, he feels confident that he has already taught
it once, and hence when he comes to teach the work a second time, he is
likely to be careless and lazy; so that lapses in the text become
possible; hence the text has added the phrase ‘*first of all*’.—‘*With
due care*,’—the term ‘*vidhi*,’ ‘*care*,’ stands here for the quality,
in the teacher and the pupil, of having undiverted attention, a
concentrated mind; and the affix ‘*vati*’ (in the term ‘*vidhivat*’)
signifies *capability, possession*.

‘*Then I taught it to Marīci and other sages*.’—In as much as Marīci and
the other sages are persons of well-known reputation, when Manu speaks
of such well-known persons having learnt the Law from him, he describes
his connection with specially qualified pupils, and thereby indicates
his well-established professional dignity; and by pointing out the
importance of the Law, he produces in the minds of the great sages (who
have asked him in verse 1 *et seq*. to propound the Law) faith and
confidence, so that they may be unremitting in their study; the idea
being—‘So important is this Law that oven such great sages as Marīci and
the rest have learnt it,—Manu also is such a high personage that he is
the Teacher of those great sages,—so that it is highly proper that this
Treatise should be learnt from him with this idea in their minds, the
enquirers who have come to hear the Law propounded would not cease to
give their attention to it.—Both these facts are mentioned with a view
to eulogise the Law.—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vidhivat*’—‘With due attention’ (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja);—‘according to rule,—with due ceremonies’ (Kullūka).

In connection with the authorship of the Smṛti see *Bhāṣya* (Printed
edition, Gharpure, p. 7) and also Buhler’s Introduction p. xv. Burnell
in his footnote on Verse 58, misrepresents Medhātithi, by imputing to
him a view which he has put forward only as held by ‘some people’
‘*Kechit*’.

Parāśara-mādhava (Ācāra—p. 106) quotes this verse in support of the view
that the Smṛtis are the work of Brahmā; and it adds that—‘as Brahmā, so
Svāyambhuva Manu also, compiles the Duties that have been ordained in
the Veda;—which establishes the beginningless and immutable character of
*Dharma*.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

058	But he having composed these Institutes (of the sacred law), himself taught them, according to the rule, to me alone in the beginning; next I (taught them) to Mariki and the other sages.
</details>
