+++
title = "081 चतुष्पात् सकलो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the Kṛta Cycle Virtue exists in its perfect form, with all its four feet; and so does Truth;—No benefit accrues to men by vice—(81).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^११६]:
     M G DK (5: 809): prativartate (but see commentary that reads upavartate)

चत्वारः पादा यस्य **चतुष्पाद् धर्मः** । यागादेश् च धर्मत्वात् तस्य चानुष्ठेयस्वभावत्वाद् विग्रहाभावान् न पादशब्दः शरीरावयववचनः, किं तर्हि, अंशमात्रवचनः । न हि धर्मस्य शरीरम् अस्ति पुरुषविधं पशुपक्ष्यादिविधं वा । तेन स्वांशैश् चतुर्भिर् उपेतश् चतुष्पाद् उच्यते । तेन यो ऽयं धर्मः **चतुष्पात्** **सकलः** **कृतयुग** आसीत् । यागस्य तावत् प्रयोगावस्थस्य चत्वारो होतृकाः, होता ब्रह्मा उद्गाता अध्वर्युर् इति । चत्वारो वर्णाः कर्तार आश्रमा वा । सर्वथा यावान् वेदे धर्म उक्तः स सर्वस् तस्मिन् काले ऽंशतो ऽपि न हीनः अविगुणः सर्वो ऽनुष्ठीयते । बाहुल्येन चतुःसंख्या । एवं दानादिष्व् अपि योज्यम्- दाता द्रव्यं पात्रं भावतुष्टिः । अथ वा यागदानतपांसि ज्ञानं च । तथा वक्ष्यति "तपः परम्" (म्ध् १.८६) इति । 

- अथ वा धर्मप्रतिपादकं वाक्यं धर्मः । तस्य च चत्वारः पादाः चत्वारि पदजातानि । नामाख्याते चोपसर्गनिपाताश् च । तथा चाह- 

- चत्वारि वाक्परिमिता पदानि तानि विदुर् ब्राह्मणा ये मनीषिणः । (र्व् १.१६४.४५अब्)

मनस ईषिणः (पत् इ- ३) समर्था विद्वांसो धार्मिकाः । अद्यत्वे तु-

- गुहा[^११७] त्रीणि निहिता[^११८] नेङ्गयन्ति (र्व् १.१६४.४५च्) 


[^११८]:
     M G J: nihitāni (I follow DK 5: 810)


[^११७]:
     M G J: guhāyāṃ (perhaps influenced by the explanatory statement in Pat I: 3).

न हि प्रकाशन्ते । 

- तुरीयं वाचं[^११९] मनुष्या वदन्ति (र्व् १.१६४.४५द्) ॥


[^११९]:
     M G: vāco; G 2nd ed.: bhāgo

चतुर्थं भागं वैदिका[^१२०] मनुष्या वदन्ति ।[^१२१] एतद् उक्तं भवति- आदौ न वेदवाक्यं[^१२२] किंचिद् अन्तरितम्, न च काचिद् वेदशाखा । अद्यत्वे तु बह्वन्तरितम् । 


[^१२२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: ādau na vedavākyaṃ


[^१२१]:
     M G 1st ed.: na hi prakāśanta | turīyaṃ bhāgaṃ vaidikānāṃ manuṣyā vadanti (thus combining the RV citation and the explanatory statement). This whole section has been confused in the editions because of the failure to distinguish the RV citations from the commentarial explanations.


[^१२०]:
     G 2nd ed.: vaidikānāṃ

- **सत्यं** चैवं **सकलम्** इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । सत्य् अपि सत्यस्य विहितत्वाद् धर्मत्वे, प्राधान्यार्थं[^१२३] पृथग् उपदेशः, हेत्वर्थे वा । सकलस्य धर्मानुष्ठानस्य सत्यं हेतुः । ये त्व् अनृतिनस् ते लोकावर्जनार्थं किंचिद् अनुतिष्ठन्ति, अन्यत् त्यजन्ति । 


[^१२३]:
     M G 1st ed.: prādhānyārthaḥ

- **नाधर्मेण**[^१२४] निषिद्धेन मार्गेण **कश्चिद् आगमो** विद्या वार्थो वानुष्ठातुर्[^१२५] **उपवर्तते** आगच्छति, युगस्वाभाव्यात् । न मनुष्या अधर्मेण विद्याम् आगमयन्ति, नापि धनम् अर्जयन्ति । विद्याधने धर्मानुष्ठानकारणे, तत्परिशुद्धिः सकलधर्मसद्भावस्य हेतुत्वेनानेनोच्यते[^१२६] ॥ १.८१ ॥


[^१२६]:
     M G: hetutvena nocyate


[^१२५]:
     DK (5: 810): vānuṣṭhātum


[^१२४]:
     J: nādharme
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Virtue is that which has “four feet.” What constitutes ‘virtue’ is the
action of sacrifice and the like; and as this latter is something to he
performed, it has no body; hence the word ‘feet’ in the text cannot be
taken as denoting the part of a body; it stands for ‘part’ or ‘factor.’
As a matter of fact, Virtue has no body, either like men or like birds
and animals. Hence what is meant by Virtue having all its ‘four feet’ is
that it is equipped with all its four factors. The meaning of the text
thus is that such virtue as is perfect and equipped with its four
factors existed in the *Kṛta* Cycle.—\[*The* ‘*four factors’ are now
illustrated*\]—At the sacrifice, when it is in course of performance,
there are four priests—viz., the ‘*Hotṛ*,’ the ‘*Brahman*,’ the
‘*Udgātṛ*’ and the ‘*Adhvaryu*’;—of the performers there are *four
castes*, or *four life-stages*. ‘*Virtue*’ as it is described in the
Veda was performed during that cycle in its entire and perfect form;
*i.e*., it was not deficient in even the smallest factor, and it was not
wanting in any of its details. The number ‘four’ is applicable to Virtue
in many ways. For instance, in the case of the action of ‘giving’ also,
there is the giver, the thing given, the recipient and his satisfaction.
Or the ‘four factors’ of Virtue may be sacrifice, charity, austerity,
and knowledge. This would he in accordance with what is going to be
described in verse 86 as regards ‘Austerity’ being the chief virtue in
the *Kṛta age*.

Or, the term ‘*Dharma*’ ‘*Virtue*’ in the text, may be taken as standing
for the *words descriptive of Virtue*; and of such words the ‘four feet’
are the four kinds of words—Nouns, Verbs, Prepositions and
Indeclinables. This is thus declared in *Ṛgveda* 1.164.45—‘There are
four words contained in speech, these the wise Brāhmaṇas know’—(in this
passage) the epithet ‘*manīsiṇaḥ*,’ ‘*wise*,’ stands for those ‘who are
of powerful minds,’ *i.e*., learned, virtuous;—(the passage goes on)
‘these, placed in the cave, do not appear to view,’—*i.e*., are not
perceptible—‘the fourth speech people speak’—the fourth, people versed
in the Veda speak. The meaning of this passage is that—‘in the
beginning, no Vedic sentence was hidden from view, nor was any Vedic
Rescensional Text lost, while now a days, much has become lost.’

‘*So does truth*,’—that is, truth also exsists in its perfect form.
Though truth also, being what is prescribed in the Veda, is a ‘virtue’
(and as such already included in the latter term), yet it has been
separately mentioned with a view to show its special importance, or to
indicate that it forms the basis of all virtues, the performance of
‘virtue’ in its entire form is based upon truth; and those who are
untruthful, perform, for the purpose of gaining popularity, only a part
of what constitutes ‘virtue’ and ignore the rest of it.

‘*By vice*’—*i.e*., by following the prohibited path ,—‘*no benefit*’—in
the shape of either *learning* or wealth,—‘*accrues*’—comes—to the
performer; this is by virtue of the special character of the age.
(During that age) men do not acquire learning, nor do they earn wealth,
by vicious means. Learning and wealth are the means by which virtuous
acts are performed; hence when it is said that these are pure, what is
meant is that this is what tends to virtue being performed in its entire
and perfect form—(81).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Dharma with its ‘four feet’ is a common idea in Hinduism. In VIII. 16 we
have the picture of Dharma as a ‘bull’; its ‘four feet’ have been
variously identified:—(*a*) according to Medhātithi, they represent the
four principal sacrificial priests—*Adhvaryu*, *Hotṛ*, *Brahman* and
*Udgātṛ*;—(*b*) he also suggests, along with Nandana, that they may
stand for the four castes;—(*c*) they have been held by Medhātithi,
Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa to stand for the four means of acquiring
merit—*Tapas, Jñāna, Yajña* and *Dāna*;—(*d*) and last, they have been
identified by Medhātithi with the four kinds of speech described in
*Ṛgveda* 1.164.45—‘Three being hidden in the cave and the fourth being
spoken by men.’

‘*Satyam*’—Though included in ‘*Dharma*,’ this has been mentioned
separately, for the purpose of showing its special importance. The
*Aparārka* (p. 1012) quotes the first line of this verse as showing the
diverse character of the various cycles.—The verse is quoted in the
Vīramitrodaya—Parībhāṣā, p. 50.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verse 81-86)  
**

*Mahābhārata*, 12.231.23-28.—(Same as Manu.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

081	In the Krita age Dharma is four-footed and entire, and (so is) Truth; nor does any gain accrue to men by unrighteousness.
</details>
