+++
title = "084 वेदोक्तम् आयुर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The full age of mortals spoken of in the Veda, the results of actions and the powers of embodied beings,—are obtained in accordance with the character of the Cycle.—(84)


yadi pañca pañāśataḥ ‘trivṛtaḥ’ (i. e., the three days of the Gavāmayana), na saṃvatsarāḥ | yadi saṃvatsarāḥ ‘trivṛtaḥ’, na pañcapañcāśataḥ | tasmāt virodhādanyatarad gauṇam |
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

<u>केचिद्</u> आहुः- वैदिकैः कर्मभिः सहस्रसंवत्सरादिभिर् अपेक्षितम् **आयुर् वेदोक्तम्** । तद् **अनुयुगं फलति,** युगानुरूपेण संपद्यते, न सर्वेषु युगेषु । नाद्य कश्चित् सहस्रसंवत्सरजीवी । यः सर्वश् चिरं जीवति स वर्षशतम् । 

- तद् <u>अपरे</u> नाद्रियन्ते । यतो दीर्घसत्त्रेषु संवत्सरशब्दे दिवसेषु व्यवस्थापिते (च्ड़्। प्म्स् ६.७.३१–४०) विधेयान्तरविरोधाद् वाक्यभेदापत्तेः । एष हि तत्र ग्रन्थः- "पञ्चपञ्चाशतस् त्रिवृतः संवत्सराः" (त्ब् ३.१२.९.८) इत्यादि । तत्र त्रीण्य अहानि गवांअयनप्रकृतित्वात् प्राप्तानि । विशिष्टा तु संख्या[^१३५] पञ्चपञ्चाशत इत्य् अप्राप्तत्वाद् विधेया[^१३६] । यद्य् अपरा संवत्सरता प्रतीयेत वाक्यं भिद्येत । तत्रावश्यम् अन्यतरस्यानुवाद आश्रयितव्यः । संवत्सरशब्दः सौरसावनादिमान् अभेदेन षष्ट्यधिकशतत्रयात्मनो ऽहःसंघाताद् अन्यत्रापि दृष्टप्रयोग एवेति । तस्यैव लक्षणया दिवसेष्व् अनुवादो युक्त इति ।


[^१३६]:
     M G J: aprāptavidheyā (I follow DK 5: 811)


[^१३५]:
     M G J: viśiṣṭānusaṃkhyā (I follow DK 5: 811)

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्त्रार्थवादेषु "शतम् इन् नु शरदो ऽन्ति देवाः" (र्व् १.८९.९), "शतायुर् वै पुरुषः" (क्स् ३४.५) इति शतशब्दश् च बहुनामसु पठितः, बहुत्वं चानवस्थितम् । युगानुरूपेण दीर्घजीविनो ऽल्पायुषश् च भवन्ति । यथाश्रुतव्याख्याने तु कलौ सर्वे शतायुषश् च भवन्ति । अथ वा आयुःकामस्य यानि कर्माणि, न च तत्र प्रमाणं श्रुतम्, तत्रानुयुगं परिमाणं वेद्यम् । 

- **आशिषः** । अन्या अपि फलविषया वेदशासनाः । काम्यानां **कर्मणाम्** । आयुषः काम्यत्वे ऽपि प्राधान्यात् पृथगुपदेशः । तथा ह्य् आह- "आयुर् वै परमः कामः" । **प्रभावः** अलौकिकी शक्तिः, अणिमादिगुणयोगः, अभिशाप्ः, वरदानम् । **अनुयुगं फलन्तीति** सर्वत्र योज्यम् ॥ १.८४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people offer the following explanation:—What is meant ‘*the age
spoken of in the Veda*’ is the age of a thousand years and so forth,
which is indicated by the Veda prescribing such rites as are mentioned
as extending over ‘thousand years’; and this age is ‘*obtained*’,
reached, only in accordance with the nature of the Cycle, and not in all
Cycle; for instance, now-a-days no one ever lives for ‘thousand years’
he who lives long, lives for a *hundred* years.

There are others who do not accept this explanation, and for the
following reasons:—It has been decided (under Mīmāmsā-Sutras 6. 7.31-40)
that when the term ‘year’ occurs in the Veda in connection with the long
sacrificial sessions, it stands for ‘days’; so that if something else
(in the shape *of years*) were taken as enjoined, then there would he an
inconsistency, and this would lead to the ‘splitting of the
sentence’;—the text in connection with the subject is in the form
‘*pañcapañc??hatah tṛvṛtaḥ samvatsarāḥ*’, ‘the fifty-five trios, years’
(literally); now hero what is definitely indicated by the context is
that the term ‘trio’ stands for the *three days* of the *??vāmayana*
Sacrifice; so that it is in regard to these that the particular number
(*Fifty-five*) is laid down; under the circumstances, if the sentence,
by virtue of the term ‘*Samvatsarāḥ*’, ‘years’, were taken as laying
down the further unknown fact? the said (*trios*) being ‘years’,—then
there would be a?it in the sentence; in order to avoid this, it becomes
necessary to take one or the other of the words as merely *reite??ive*
(not *injunctive*);—now

as regards the term ‘*Samvatsara*’, ‘year’, we find that, on the basis
of diverse calculations, known as the ‘*Saura*’, the ‘*Sāvana*’ and so
forth, it is often used in a sense other than that of a collection of
exactly *three hundred and sixty day*; so that it is only right that
this term (and not the term ‘*fifty-five*’) should be taken
figuratively, as being descriptive of ‘*days*’.

Others again argue as follows:—Among the *Mantra* and *Arthavāda* texts
of the Veda we find such egressions as—‘The gods live for a *hundred*
years’, ‘the man’s life is of hundred years’, and so forth,—where the
term ‘hundred’ is found used in the sense of ‘*many*’ and ‘man’ is
purely indefinite; hence the meaning (of our text,) is that ‘men are
short-lived or long-lived according to the Cycle’.—If the verse were
taken in its literal sense, it would mean that during *Kali* all men
live for a hundred years, and this would not be true\],—Or, it may mean
that the exact extent of ‘full age’—which is found mentioned as the
result of sacrifices performed by the man desiring *full age*—being
nowhere defined the extent should be taken as determined by the
character of the particular Cycle.

‘*Results*’—i.e., the things desired as results. described in the Veda,
proceeding from acts performed with a purpose.—Though ‘full age’ also is
a *desired result*, yet it has been mentioned separately in view of its
importance; as declared in such words as—‘Full age is the highest
desirable object’.

‘*Power*’—i.e. the superphysio faculties, consisting in being equipped
with *aṇimā* (the faculty of becoming as small as one likes) and such
other faculties’,—or in the form of ability to pronounce effective
curses, as? bestowing effective boons

‘*Are obtained in accordance with the character of the Cycle*’—this has
to be construed with all (three phrases)—(84).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Medhātithi* (p. 39, l. 5)—‘*Dīrghasatreṣu*’—Sec Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra 6.7.31-40
and Śabara on 6.7.7—

> *yadi pañca pañāśataḥ ‘trivṛtaḥ*’ (*i*. *e*., the three days of the
> *Gavāmayana*), *na saṃvatsarāḥ* \| *yadi saṃvatsarāḥ ‘trivṛtaḥ’, na
> pañcapañcāśataḥ* \| *tasmāt virodhādanyatarad gauṇam* \|

This is the *virodha* mentioned by Medhātithi in line (6\] Which of the
two is to be taken as *gauṇa* is explained by Śabara on 6.7.38, where
the conclusion is that the term *saṃvatsara* should be regarded as
*gauṇa*.

*Medhātithi* ( p. 39, l. 12 )—*Śataśabdaśca bahunāmasu
pāṭhitaḥ*’—*e.g*., *Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad* 2. 11; *Īśā Upaniṣad 2*;
*Mahānarāyaṇa Upaniṣad* 6,—in addition to the passages quoted by
Medhātithi himself.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(Verse 81-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse 1.81 (Dharma in the
Kṛta-yuga)].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

084	The life of mortals, mentioned in the Veda, the desired results of sacrificial rites and the (supernatural) power of embodied (spirits) are fruits proportioned among men according to (the character of) the age.
</details>
