+++
title = "060 संयोगम् पतितैर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who associates with outcasts, he who approaches the wife of another person, and he who has stolen the property of a Brāhmaṇa, become ‘Brahmarākṣasas.’—(60)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रिमे श्लोके व्याख्यातम्।)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

\[The *Bhāṣya* has nothing to say on this verse\]
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāṣharamādhava* (Prāyaścitta p. 492 and p.
511).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 12.60-68)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (3.211-215, 217).—‘Having approached another man’s wife,
and having misappropriated the property of a Brāhmaṇa, one becomes a
*Brahmarākṣasa* in desolate wilderness. Stealer of gems are born among
the lowest castes; the stealer of perfumes, as a musk-rat, The stealer
of grains becomes a rat; the stealer of a vehicle, a camel; that of
fruits, a monkey; that of water, a *Plava* bird; that of milk, a crow;
that of household requisites, the *Gṛhakāri* animal; that of honey, a
flea; that of flesh, a vulture; that of a cow, an alligator; that of
fire, a crane; that of cloth, suffers from leucoderma; that of juice, a
dog; that of salt, a *Cīrī* bird.—Having passed through the bodies of
several animals, as a consequence of their acts, men become, in course
of time, born again as poor and low men devoid of all good qualities.’

*Viṣṇu* (44.14-44).—‘After having suffered the torments of hells, the
evil-doers pass into animal bodies. Criminals of the highest degree
enter the bodies of plants, one after the other. Mortal sinners enter
the bodies of worms or insects; minor offenders, those of birds; animals
of the fourth degree, that of aquatic animals; those who have committed
crimes effecting loss of caste, enter the bodies of amphibious animals;
those who have committed a crime degrading one to a mixed caste enter
the bodies of deer; those who have committed a crime rendering them
unfit to receive alms enter the bodies of cattle; those who have
committed a crime causing defilement enter the bodies of low-caste men
who may not be touched; those who have committed one of the
miscellaneous crimes enter the bodies of miscellaneous wild carnivorous
animals. One who has eaten the food of one whose food should not be
eaten, or forbidden food, becomes a worm or insect. thief becomes a
falcon. One who has appropriated a broad path, becomes an animal living
in holes. The stealer of grains becomes a rat; that of copper, a
*Haṃsa*; that of water, a water-fowl; that of honey, a gad-fly; that of
milk, a crow; that of juice, a dog; that of clarified butter, an
ichneumon; that of meat, a vulture; that of fat, a cormorant; that of
oil, a cockroach; that of salt, a cricket; that of sour milk, a crane;
that of silk, a partridge; that of linen, a frog; that of cloth, a
curlew; that of cow, an iguana; that of sugar, a *Vālguda*; that of
perfumes, a musk-rat; that of vegetable and leaves, a peacock; that of
prepared grain, a boar called *Śvāvidh*; that of undressed grain, a
porcupine; that of fire, a crane; that of household utensils, a wasp;
that of dyed cloth, a *Chakora* bird; that of an elephant, a tortoise;
that of a horse, a tiger; that of fruits or blossoms, an ape; that of
women, a bear; that of a vehicle, a camel; that of cattle, a vulture. He
who has taken by force any property belonging to another, or eaten food
not previously presented to the gods, inevitably enters the body of some
beast.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

060	He who has associated with outcasts, he who has approached the wives of other men, and he who has stolen the property of a Brahmana become Brahmarakshasas.
</details>
