+++
title = "118 सर्वम् आत्मनि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With a concentrated mind, one should perceive in the Self all things, real as well as unreal. One who perceives all things in the Self never turns his mind towards wrong.—(118)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सर्वं** जगत् **सदसद्**रूपम् उत्पत्तिविनाशधर्मकम् । अथ **असत्**[^३९४] शशविषाणादिवत् सच् च[^३९५] नित्यम् आकाशादिवत् **सर्वम् आत्मनि संपश्येद्** आत्मनि व्यवस्थितम् उपासीत । 


[^३९५]:
     M G: yac ca


[^३९४]:
     M G: vānyaḥ

- संदर्शनार्थस्य स्पष्टार्थस्य साक्षात्करणपर्यन्तयोपासनया विज्ञायते । न हि सकृद्दर्शनेन साक्षात्कारः संभवति । तथोपदिश्यते रहस्यशास्त्रम् । तत्रात्मध्यानायैतद् उक्तं भवति "श्रोतव्यो मन्तव्यो निदिह्यासितव्यः" (बाउ २.४.५) इति ध्यानपर्यन्तता सद्दर्शनस्य[^३९६] । आत्मध्यानं यथोपदिष्टज्ञानाभ्यासो विजातीयप्रत्ययान्तरितम् उच्यते । अथ वा सामर्थ्याद् अभ्यासाक्षेपः । यतः संस्कारकर्माणि[^३९७] च संस्कार्ये विशेषाधानेन संपन्नस्वार्थानि भवन्ति । यथा "व्रीहीन् अवहन्ति" (आप्श्र् १.२१.७) इति अश्रुतोपन्यासः[^३९८] तुषकणविप्रमोकफलेभ्यस् तत्संदर्शनेन ह्य् अदृष्टार्थता स्यात् । तथा च कर्मविधित्वात् षष्ठिसंस्कारकर्मताहानिश् च । अतः **संपशेद्** इति ज्ञेयान्तरविषयज्ञाननिराकरणेन तद् एकज्ञेयनिष्ठाम् अनुब्रूयात् । 


[^३९८]:
     M G: aśrutopanyāsa-


[^३९७]:
     M G: -karmaṇi


[^३९६]:
     M G: saddarśanena darśanasyāpy

- अत्र्**आत्मनी**ति विवदन्ते । को ऽयम् आत्मा नाम । यदि तावद् अयं देहाधिकरणः क्षेत्रज्ञः तत उत्तरं[^३९९] विरुध्येत "प्रशासितारं रुक्माभम्" (म्ध् १२.१२२) इति । न हि कर्मत्वशरीरस्य मृत्योर् उत्पत्तिः श्रूयते- एतस्य[^४००] वाक्षरस्य प्रशासने गार्गि[^४०१] द्व्यावापृथिव्यौ विधृते तिष्ठतः" (बाउ ३.८.९) इति । तस्मान् नाहंप्रत्यय्प्रेमेये[^४०२] आत्मन्य् अपि संसारविधिः । अतो ऽन्या काचित् तस्य स्वरूपसिद्धिर् वक्तव्या । किंचैवं सति **पश्येद्** इत्यादिना बाह्यात्मनाम् अप्य् आधिभूताधिदैवभावेन[^४०३] व्यवस्थितानाम् आध्यात्मम्[^४०४] उपसंहारः । शिष्यते च श्रौतम् अतोस्तरागः साधनतया कारणात्मनार्जितस्य[^४०५] संबन्धितां प्रतिपद्यते । 


[^४०५]:
     M G: kāraṇātmanā jitasya


[^४०४]:
     M G: vyavasthito nāmādhyātmam


[^४०३]:
     M G J: -ādidaiva-


[^४०२]:
     M G: neha pratya-


[^४०१]:
     M G J: gārgī


[^४००]:
     M G: naitasya


[^३९९]:
     M G: vikaraṇakṣetrajñata uttaraṃ

- <u>ननु</u> यः सर्वं जगत्कारणपुरुषावच्छेदम् उक्तं सदा प्रत्य्**आत्मनि** **संपश्येद्** इति, तत्र कीदृशम् आत्मनो दर्शनम् आत्मनीति वक्तव्यम् ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्यन्ते । शरीरात्मन एवैतत् संनिवेशनं युक्तम् । तस्य हि श्रोतृसंनिवेशेन तद्वत्ता युक्ता । 

- <u>तत्रोच्यते</u> । आत्मशब्दस् तावत् परमात्मविषयतया दर्शितवाक्यान्तरसमन्वयप्रमाणः । यत् तु[^४०६] स्वरूपसिद्धिर् वक्तव्येति तत्र किम् अन्यच् छक्यं न वक्तुम् अन्यद् अतः श्रोतृत्वज्ञानविधेः । तानि च वाक्यानि प्रतिशाखं सर्वोपनिषद्भ्यो ऽवगन्तव्यानि । प्रमाणान्तराणाम् अप्य् एकत्वप्रतिपादनपरत्वाद् एव ग्राहिणः प्रत्यक्षस्य मिश्रैः कृत एव क्लेशः । उक्तं च वाक्यपदीये[^४०७] "न तद् अस्ति च तन् नाम्नि" (ब्वक्य् ३.२.१२) इत्यादि । विध्यवगम्यता च शरीरावरकाद् अवसातव्या । 


[^४०७]:
     J: vākakpadoye; M G: vākyapradīpe


[^४०६]:
     M G: yatra

- यद् अप्य् उक्तम् असत् कथं दृश्यत[^४०८] इति सच् चासच् चेत्य् अयम् अर्थः स्यात् । सद् इति विकारग्रामस्य[^४०९] निर्देशः । असद् इत्य् अप्रत्यक्षतैव सूक्ष्मतयाशक्यावधारत्वात्[^४१०] । 


[^४१०]:
     M G: -ākṣarāvadhāratvāt


[^४०९]:
     M G: vikārasya grāmyasya


[^४०८]:
     M G: darśayann

- यद् अप्य् उक्तं नास्ति परमात्मनः श्रोत्रसंबन्ध इति । किम् अत्र संबन्धि सर्वस्य जगत्स्थित्युत्पत्तिविनाशानां तत्कारणतयोपपादित्वात् । 

- यश् चायं संनिवेशविधिस् तस्यायम् अर्थः । यावद् यत् किंचिद् भेदवद् अवभासते तत् सर्वम् अद्वैतिकत्वे प्रविलापयेत् । सर्वम् आत्मस्थम् इत्य् एतत् परमात्मनो विरतिसामान्ये हेतुर् विद्यत इति । 

- **समाहितः** । समाधिर् नाम चित्तवृत्तिनिरोधोपायो योगशास्त्राद् आगमयितव्य इत्य् अर्थः । **नाधर्मे कुरुते मतिं** बुद्धिचेतसोर्[^४११] निश्चलताभावः । तावद् अभ्यसेद् यावद् वादिभिश् चेतो नापह्रियेत । अतश् च यावत् कश्चिद् भेदकत्वे प्रतिविलापयेत्[^४१२] ॥ १२.११८ ॥


[^४१२]:
     M G: prativilāpayeta


[^४११]:
     M G: buddhiś cetaso
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*All things*’—the world—‘*real and unreal*’—*i.e*., which is liable to
be produced and to be destroyed; or that which is eternal like the
*Ākāśa*, or what is an absolute non-entity, like the ‘hare’s horn’—all
this one should perceive in the Self;—that is, he should contemplate
upon all this as centred in the Self.

What ‘*perceiving*’ connotes is a clear conception; and this can only be
obtained by constant contemplation; as no dear conception of a thing can
be obtained by merely seeing it once. It is for this reason that the
Esoteric Science has been propounded. And in connection with the
contemplation of the Self, we have such texts as—‘It should be listened
to, thought, upon and meditated upon,’ where the act of *seeing* is
spoken of as extending up to *meditation*.

That is called ‘Contemplation of the Self’ which consists in repeated
meditation upon It, without the intervention of any other foreign
object.

Or, mere *repetition* (of the act of seeing) may be taken as what is
implied by the term ‘*perceive*’ As a matter of fact, all purificatory
acts have their purpose fulfilled only when they impart to the purified
object a certain peculiar excellence; as is found in the case of the
thumping of the corn; where, even though the repetition of the act of
thumping is not directly laid down, yet it becomes implied by the fact
that without such repeated thumping the corns cannot be cleared of all
their husk. If the act were to be left off before this had been
accomplished, it could only be regarded as leading to some invisible
(transcendental) result; and in that case the act would cease to be
‘purificatory’.

For this reason the term ‘*should perceive*’ should be taken to mean the
giving up of all other acts, and the repeating of the act of perceiving
of the one object in view.

In regard to the ‘*Self*’ spoken of here, people dispute over its exact
meaning:—“What is it that is called ‘Self,’ ‘*ātman*’? (A) If it stands
for the Conscious Entity ensouling the body, then this is inconsistent
with what follows regarding ‘the Ruler, the Soul, bright like gold, eta,
etc.’ (in 122); since we do not hear of anybody appearing for such a
being,—since what is declared regarding It is—‘O Gārgi, the Sun and the
Moon remain under the control of this Imperishable One, so also Heaven
and Earth have been upheld by him’ (*Bṛhadāraṇyaka*

*Upaniṣad*). For those reasons the transmigratory process cannot belong
to that Self with regard to which we have the notion of ‘I’; so that
some other form will have to be pointed out as belonging to the ‘Self’
spoken of here. Further, under the said explanation, by virtue of what
the text lays down regarding ‘perceiving all things in the Self,’ even
things external, at least in their spiritual aspects, will have to be
regarded as being resolved into the Individual Soul (which is absurd).
The only alternative left is to regard the ‘Self’ as standing for that
which is the original source of all Being, of the whole Universe, one
that interpenetrates all entities. Hut in regard to this it will be
necessary to explain what exactly would be meant by^(‘)perceiving all
things in the Self.’ Others have held that what is referred to is the
Bodily Self, in which all things are to be perceived.

Our explanation is as follows—As regards the term ‘*ātman*,’ ‘Self,’ it
has been already shown that all authorities agree in pointing to its
standing for the Supreme Self. As for what has been said above regarding
the necessity for pointing out the exact form of the ‘Self’ here
meant,—what else could be said on the point, except what is found
asserted under the Injunctions of ‘listening to......and knowing’ this
Self;—all such injunctions can be found out from the various Upaniṣads
belonging to the various Vedic texts. Then again, it is because there
are other proofs also of the unity of this Self that Miśra has taken
such pains to explain the actual facts of perception (which point to
diversity). The following passage is found in the *Vākyapadīya*—‘There
is nothing in name, etc.’ The fact of this Self being comprehended with
the help of Injunctions may be ascertained from the fact of the Body
being Its covering, etc.

As for the objection as to how what is ‘*asat*’ (unreal) can be seen;—in
the phrase ‘the *real and the unreal*’ the term ‘*real*’ stands for the
whole aggregate of worldly products, and ‘*unreal*’ for such subtle
objects as are ordinarily *not perceptible*.

Another question that has been raised is—“How can the Supreme Self have
any connection with *hearing* (such as is mentioned in the Injunction
that ‘the Self should be heard, etc., etc.)?’”

But what to say of connection with *Hearing*? In fact the birth,
existence and dissolution of the entire Universe has been proved to have
its source in that Self.

As for the Injunction regarding the resolving of all things into the
Self,—what is actually meant is that ‘whatever appears to be diverse,
all that one should resolve into that *One* Entity.’ And what is meant
by everything subsisting in the Self, is that one should cease to have
any hankering for the things of the world.

‘*With concentrated mind*.’—This ‘*Concentration*’ means ‘the
controlling of the operation of the mind’; and how this is to be done is
to be learnt from the *Yoga-śāstra*.

‘*Never turns his mind towards wrong*.’—This connotes the immobility of
the intellect and the mind. What is here prescribed should be practised
until the mind ceases to be perturbed by disputants; and whatever there
may be of diversity should he resolved into the one Supreme Self.—118
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ātmani*’.—‘In the supreme self’ (Kullūka and Nandana),—‘in his Own
individual self’ (Govindarāja).

‘*Sadasat*’.—‘The products and the causes, or the intelligent and the
non-intelligent’ (Nandana),—‘that which has shape and which is
shapeless’ (Govindarāja),—‘that which comes into existence and
perishes,’ or ‘that which is an absolute non-entity and that which is
eternal’ (proposed by Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1027).
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> एतद् वो ऽयं भृगुः शास्त्रं श्रावयिष्यत्य् अशेषतः ।  
> एतद् धि मत्तो ऽधिजगे सर्वम् एषो ऽखिलं मुनिः ॥ इति । *म्ध् १.५९)

यद्य् अयम् उपसंहारो धर्माणाम् उत्तरास् तर्हि किमर्थाः श्लोकाः । परमात्मोपासनार्थाः । तथा चोत्तरत्राध्यात्मम् एव वक्ष्यते, न तु धर्माः केचन वक्ष्यन्ते । उक्तत्वात् तेषाम् । एवं च सति पूर्वश्लोक उक्तानां सर्वधर्माणाम् उपसंहारार्थः, न तु शात्रस्य । शास्त्रं तु परमात्मविषयम् उपासनापदर्थं साद्यात्मम् उत्तरत्रोपसंहरिष्यति-

> इत्य् एतन् मानवं शास्त्रं भृगुप्रोक्तं पठन् द्विजः ।  
> भवत्य् आचारवान् नित्यं यथेष्टां चाप्नुयाद् गतिम् ॥ इति । (म्ध् १२.१२६)

न केवलम् एतद् एव धर्मगुह्यं यद् उक्तं धर्मोपसंहारे- **एवं स भगवान् देवो लोकानां हितकाम्यया** इत्य् एवमादि, किं तर्हीदं चापरं परमात्मविषयं तत्प्रसंख्यानम् अध्यात्मोपासनारूपं धर्मगुह्यम् उच्यते ॥ १२.११७ ॥

केचिद् आहुः क्षेत्रज्ञात्मविषयं तत्प्रसंख्यानम् अध्यात्मोपासनारूपं धर्मगुह्यम् । न, विरुद्धत्वात् । वक्ष्यति हि- "प्रशासितारं सर्वेषाम्" इत्य् एवमादि । यत इदं परमात्मविषयम् एव्**आत्म**ग्रहणं विज्ञेयम् । तथा च प्रदर्शयिष्यामः । श्लोकम् इदानीं विवृणु[म]ः । **सर्वं** यद् वक्ष्यति । **सच् चासच् चेति** तद् व्यक्ताव्यक्तं सविकारं प्रधानम् उच्यते । **आत्मनीति** सर्ववेदशाखोपनिषदस् तत्त्वे परमात्मनीत्य् अर्थः । अध्यस्तं व्यवस्थितं तदधीनवृत्तिभेदपक्षे, तदात्मकतया वाभेदपक्ष इति केचित् । **संपश्येद्** इत्य् उपासीतेत्य् अर्थः । कथम् एवं यथोवचाम । तथा च पश्यतिर् उपासनार्थो विज्ञेयः । तस्य विशेषणं **समाहितः** आस्तिक्येन श्रद्धया यमनियमैर् वा समाहितात्मा पश्येत् । अस्य फलार्थवादः फलविधिर् वायम्- **सर्वं ह्य् आत्मनि संपश्यन् नाधर्मे कुरुते मनः**, परमात्मत्वेन सर्वम् इदं पश्यन् । यतश् च ॥ १२.११८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

118	Let (every Brahmana), concentrating his mind, fully recognise in the Self all things, both the real and the unreal, for he who recognises the universe in the Self, does not give his heart to unrighteousness.
</details>
