+++
title = "02 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
18.2 Some kavayah, learned ones; viduh, know; sannyasam, sannyasa, the
meaning of the word sannyasa, the non-performance of what comes as a
duty; to be the nyasam, giving up; karmanam, of actions; kamyanam, done
with a desire for reward, e.g. Horse-sacrifice etc.
Sarva-karma-phala-tyagah, abandonment of the results of all actions,
means the giving up of the results accruing to oneself from all actions-
the daily obligatory and the occasional (nitya and naimittika) that are
performed. Vicaksanah, the adepts, the learned ones; prahuh, call, speak
of that; as tyagam, tyaga, as the meaning of the word tyaga. Even if
'the giving up of actions for desired results' or 'the abandonment of
results' be the intended meaning, in either case the one meaning of the
words sannyasa and tyaga amounts only to tyaga (giving up); they do not
imply distinct categories as do the words 'pot' and 'cloth'. Objection:
Well, is it not that they say the daily obligatory (nitya) and the
occasional (naimittika) rites and duties have no results at all; How is
the giving up of their results spoken of-like the abandoning of a son of
a barren woman;! Reply: This defect does not desire. It is the intention
of the Lord that the nitya-karmas (daily obligatory duties) also have
results; for the Lord will say, 'The threefold results of actions-the
undesirable, the desirable and the mixed-accrue after death to those who
do not resort to tyaga', and also, 'but never to those who resort to
sannyasa (monks)' (12). Indeed, by showing that, it is only in the case
of sannyasins (monks) alone that there is no connection with the results
of actions, the Lord asserts in, '৷৷.accrue after death to those who do
not resort to tyaga (renunciation)' (abid.), that the result of daily
obligatory (nitya) duties accrue to those who are not sannyasins
(monks).
