+++
title = "03 त्याज्यन् दोषवदित्येके"

+++
18.3 Eke, some; manisinah, learned ones, subscribing to the views of the
Sankhyas and others; prahuh, say; that dosavat, beset with evil (as it
is);-What is it;- karma, action, all actions, becuase they are the cause
of bondage; tyajyam, should be given up even by those who are eligible
for actions (rites and duties). Or, it (action) is to be given up
dosavat, just as defects such as attachment etc. are renounced. Ca and,
in that very context; apare, others; (say) that yajana-dana-tapah-karma,
the practice of sacrifice, charity and auterity; na tyajyam, should not
be given up. These alternatives are with regard to only those who are
alified for action, but not with regard to the monks who are steadfast
in Knowledge and have gone beyond the stages of life. This discussion is
not concerned with those who are held to be outside the scope of
eligibility for action in the assertion (by the Lord), 'The
steadfastness in the Yoga of Knowledge by men of realization was spoken
of by Me in the days of yore' (see 3.3). Objection: Well, just as those
who are alified for rites and duties and who have their distinct
steadfastness are being considered here in the chapter summarizing the
entire scripture, though they have been dealt with earlier in
'৷৷.through the Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3), similarly, let even
the men of realization who are steadfast in Knowledge be considered
here. Reply: No, because it is not logical that their renunciation
should result from delusion and sorrow (cf. 7 and 8). The men of
realization do not perceive in the Self the sorrows arising from
physical torment; for it has been shown that desire etc. are attributes
only of the field (body) (see 13.6). Therefore, they do not renounce
action but of fear for physical trouble and pain. Nor do they perceive
actions in the Self, on account of which they should give up obligatory
duties out of delusion. In fact, they renounce with the conviction that
'action belongs to the organs' (see 3.28); 'I certainly do not do
anything' (see 5.8); for, the mode of renunciation of an enlightened
person was shown in, '৷৷.having given up all actions mentally' (5.13).
Therefore, those others who are alified for rites and duties, who are
unelightened about the Self, and for whom renunciation is possible out
of delusion and from fear of physical trouble, are alone condemned as
persons who, being possessed of tamas and rajas, resort to renunciation.
And this is done with a veiw to eulogizing the renunciation of the
results of rites and duties by the unenlightened men of action. Besides,
the men of renunciation in the real sense have been particularly pointed
out in, 'who has renounced ever undertaking,' 'who is silent, content
with anything, homeless, steadyminded' (12.16, 19), and also (while
determining) the characteristics of one who has transcended the gunas
(Chapter 14). The Lord will further say, '৷৷.which is the supreme
consummation of Knowledge' (50). Therefore the monks steadfast in
Knowledge are not intended to be spoken of here. It is only the
abandoning of the results of action which, by virtue of its being imbued
with the ality of sattva, is spoken of as sannyasa in contrast to the
renunciation of actions which is possessed of tamas etc.; it is not
sannyasa in the primary-sense-the renunciation of all actions.
Objection: According to the reason shown in the text, 'Since it is not
possible for one who holds on to a body to give up actions entirely'
(11), may it not be argued that the actions entirely' (11), may it not
be argued that the word sannyasa is certainly used in the primary sense
because it is impossible to abandon all works; Reply: No, for the next
adducing the reason is meant for eulogy. Just as, 'From renunciation
immediately (follows) Peace' (12.12), is a mere eulogy of renunciation
of the fruits of action, it having been enjoined on Arjuna who was
unenlightened and incapable of undertaking the various alternatives
(paths) as stated earlier, so also is this sentence, 'Since it is not
possible for one who holds on to a body to give up actions entirely'
(11), meant for eulogizing the renunciation of the resorts of all
actions. No one can point an exception to the proposition that 'having
given up all actions mentally, (the embodied man of self-control)
continues happily৷৷.without doing or causing (others) to do anything at
all' (see 5.13). Therefore these alternative veiws regarding sannyasa
and tyaga are concerned only with those who are alified for rites and
duties. But the enlightened ones who have realized the supreme Truth are
competent only for steadfastness in Knowledge, which is characterized by
renunciation of all actions; not for anything else. Hence, they do not
come within the purview of the alternative veiws. Thus has this been
pointed out by us in connection with the text, '৷৷.he who knows this One
as indestructible৷৷.' (2.21) as also in the beginning of the third
chapter.
