+++
title = "06 एतान्यपि तु"

+++
18.6 Tu, but; api, even; etani, these; karmani, actions, viz sacrifice,
charity and austerity, which have been spoken of as purifiers;
kartavyani, have to be undertaken; tyaktva, by renouncing; sangam,
attachment to them; and by giving up (hankering for) their phalani,
results. Iti, this; is me, My; niscitam, firm; and uttamam, best; matam,
conculsion. Having promised, 'hear from Me the firm conclusion regarding
that (tyaga)' (4) and also adduced the reason that they are purifiers,
the utterance, 'Even these actions have to be performed. This is the
firm and best conclusion', is only by way of concluding the promised
subject-matter; this sentence does not introduce a fresh topic. For it
stands to reason that the phrase 'even these' refers to some immediate
topic under discussion. The implication of the word api (even) is: 'Even
these acts, which are causes of bondage to one who has attachment and
who hankers after their results, have to be undertaken by a seeker of
Liberation.' But the phrase 'even these' is not used in relation to
other acts. Others explain (thus): Since the nityakarmas have no
results, therefore (in their case) it is illogical to say, 'by giving up
attachment and (hankering for their) results'. The meaning of the phrase
etani api (even these) is that, 'even these rites and duties, which are
undertaken for desired results and are different from the nityakarmas,
have to be undertaken. What to speak of the nityakarmas like sacrifice,
charity and austerity!' (Reply:) This is wrong since it has been
established by the text, 'sacrifice, charity and austerity are verily
the purifiers,' that even the nityakarmas have results. For a seeker of
Liberation who wants to give up even the nityakarmas from fear of their
being causes of bondage, how can there be any association with actions
done for desired results; Moreover, the phrase etani api cannot apply to
actions done for desired results (kamyakarmas), since they have been
denigrated in, '৷৷.indeed, actions is ite inferior' (2.49), and in,
'৷৷.by actions other than that action meant for God' (3.9), and since,
on the strength of the texts \[Which support the two earlier
arguments.\], 'the Vedas have the three alities as their object' (2.45),
'Those who are versed in the Vedas, who are drinkers of Soma,৷৷.(pray
for the heavenly goal by worshipping) Me' (9.20), and 'they enter into
the human world on the exhaustion of their merit' (9.21), it has been
definitely stated that actions done for desired results are causes of
bondage; and also because they are far removed from the context.
