+++
title = "09 कार्यमित्येव यत्कर्म"

+++
18.9 Yat, whatever; niyatam karma, daily obligatory duty; kriyate, is
performed, accomplished; iti eva, just because; it is karyam, a bounden
duty; O Arjuna, tyaktva, by giving up; sangam, attachment; and phalam,
the result; ca eva, as well; sah, that; tyagah, renunciation, giving up
of attachment and (hankering for) the resutls of daily obligatory
duties; matah, is considered; to be sattvikah, based on sattva, arising
from sattva. We said that the Lord's utterance is proof of the
fruitfulness of daily obligatory duties. Or, even if the niyakarmas be
understood (from the Lord's worlds) to be fruitless, still the ignorant
man does certainly imagine that the nityakarmas (daily obligatory
duites) when performed produce for oneself a result either in the form
of purification of the mind or avoidance of evil. As to this, the Lord
aborts even that imagination by saying, 'by giving up the result'. Hence
it has been well said, 'by giving up attachment and the result'.
Objection: Well, is not the threefold relinishment of actions, also
called sannyasa, under discussion; As regards this, the renunciation
based on tamas and rajas have been stated. Why is the relinishment of
attachment and (desire for their) results spoken of here as the third;
This is like somody saying, 'Three Brahmanas have come. Of them two are
versed in the six auxiliaries \[The six auxiliaries are: Siksa
(Phonetics), Kalpa (Code of Rituals and Sacrifices), Vyakarana
(Grammar), Nirukta (Etymology), Chandas (Meter, Prosody), and Jyotisa
(Astronomy).-Tr.\] of the Vedas; the third is a Ksatirya!' Reply: This
is not wrong, for this is meant as a eulogy on the basis of the common
factor of renunciation. Between renunciation of actions and
renunciation. of hankering for results, there is, indeed, the similarity
of the fact of renunciation. While on this subject, by condemning
'renunciation of actions' on account of its being based on rajas and
tamas, the 'renunciation of desire for results of actions' is being
praised on account of its being based on sattva, by saying, 'that
renunciation is considered to be based on sattva.' The internal organ of
a person who is alified for rites and duties, who performs the
nityakarmas by giving up attachment and hankering for results, becomes
pure on account of its being untainted by attachment to results etc. and
refined by the nitya-karmas. When it is pure and tranil, it becomes
capable of contemplating on the Self. Since, for that very person whose
internal organ has become purified by performing the nityakarmas and who
has become ready for the knowledge of the Self, the process by which he
can become steadfast in it has to be stated, therefore the Lord says:
