+++
title = "10 न द्वेष्ट्यकुशलम्"

+++
18.10 Na devesti, he does not hate; akusalam, unbefitting; karma,
action, rites and duties meant for desired results-with the idea, 'What
is the usefulness of this which is a cause of transmigration through
fresh embodiment;' Na anusajjate, he does not become attached to;
kusale, befitting activity, daily obligatory duties, by thinking that
this is the cause of Liberation by virtue of its being the cause of
purification of the mind, rise of Knowledge and steadfastness in it.
That is to say, he does not entertain any liking even for it, because he
finds no purpose in it. Who, again, is he; Tyagi, the man of
renunciation, who has become so by having given up attachment and
rewards of action in the manner stated above. He is a tyagi who performs
nityakarmas by relinishing attachment to those acts and (their) results.
Again, it is being stated as to when that person does not hate an
unbefitting act and does not become attached to a befitting activity:
When he has become sattva-samavistah, imbued with sattva, i.e., when he
is filled with, possessed of, sattva, which is the means to the
knowledge that discriminates between the Self and the not-Self; and
hence medhavi, wise-endowed with intelligence (medha), intuitive
experience, characterized as knowledge of the Self; one possessed of
that is medhavai (wise)-; and owing to the very fact of being wise,
chinnasamsayah, freed from doubts-one whose doubts created by ignorance
have been sundered, one who is freed from doubts by his firm conviction
that nothing but abiding in the ture nature of the Self is the supreme
means to the highest Good. The person competent (for rites and duties)
who, having gradually become purified in mind through the practice of
Karma-yoga in the way described above, has realized as his own Self the
actionless Self, which is devoid of modifications like birth etc., he,
'৷৷.having given up all actions mentally, remaining at without doing or
causing (others) to do anything at all' (cf. 5.13), attains
steadfastness in Knowledge, which is characterized as 'actionless-ness'.
In this way, the purpose of the aforesaid Karma-yoga has been stated
through the present verse. On the other hand, since, for the
unenlightened person-who, while being alified (for rites and duties),
holds on to the body owing to the erroneous conception that the body is
the Self, and who has the firm conviction, 'I am the agent,' because of
the persistence of his idea that the Self is the agent-it is not
possible to renounce actions totally, therefore he has competence only
for performing enjoined duties by giving up fruits of actions. But he is
not to renounce them (actions). In order to point out this idea the Lord
says:
