+++
title = "12 अनिष्टमिष्टम् मिश्रम्"

+++
18.12 These trividham, threefold-of three kinds; phalam, results;
karmanah, of actions characterized as the righteous and the unritheous;
anistam, the undesirable, consisting in (birth in) hell, (among)
animals, etc.; istam, the desirable, consisting in (birth as) gods and
others; and misram, the mixed, having a mixture of the desirable and the
undesirable, consisting in (birht as) human beings;-these results that
are of these kinds, bhavati, accrues; pretya, after death, after the
fall of the body; atyaginam, to those who do not resort to renunciation,
to the unilllumined, the men with rites and duties, who are not men of
renunciation in the truest sense. The derivative sense of the word phala
(pha-la) is this: On accunt of being accomplished through the operation
of diverse external accessories, and a result of ignorance, comparable
to the charm cast by jugglery, a source of great delusion and appearing
as though close to the indwelling Self, it is phalgu (unsubstantial),
and as a conseence it undergoes layam (disappearance). (The result that
is of this kind accrues to those who do not resort to renunciation). Tu,
but; na kvacit, never; sannyasinam, to those who resort tomonasticism
for the sake of the highest Reality, to the class of monks called
paramahamsas who remain steadfast in Knowledge alone. For, it cannot be
that those who are devoted wholly to steadfastness in complete
enlightenment do not dig out the seed of transmigration. This is the
meaning. Therefore it is only for those who have realized the supreme
Truth that it is possible to become a monk who renounces actions
totally, because action, accessories and results are superimmpositions
on the Self through ignorance. But the renunciation of all actions is
not possible for an unenlightened person who perceives the locus (the
body etc.), action, agentship and accessories as the Self. This the Lord
shows in the following verses:
