+++
title = "13 पञ्चैतानि महाबाहो"

+++
18.13 O mighty-armed one, nibodha, learn; me, from Me; imani, these;
panca, five; karanani, factors, accessories, which are going to be
stated-for drawing the attention of his (Arjuna's) mind and for showing
the difference among these categories \[Categories: locus (body) etc\],
the Lord praises those accessories in the succeeding verses as fit for
being known-; siddhaye, for the accomplishment; sarva-karmanam, of all
actions; proktani, which have been spoken of; sankhye, in
Vedanta-sankhya is that scripture where the subject-matters \[In the
sentence, 'Thou art That', the word Thou means the individual Self, and
That means Brahman. The comprehension of their unity, and also 'hearing,
reflection and meditation' are referred to as the subject-matters.\] to
be known are fully (samyak) stated (khyayante)-; krtante, in which
actions terminate. Krtante alifies that very word (Vedanta). Krtam mean
action. That in which occurs the culmination (anta) of that krtam is
krtantam, i.e. the termination of actions. In the texts, '৷৷.as much
utility as a man has in a well' (2.46), and 'O son of Prtha, all actions
in their totality culminate in Knowledge' (4.33), the Lord shows the
cessation of all actions when the knowledge of the Self dawns. Hence (it
is said): '৷৷.which have been spoken of in that Vedanta where actions
culminate and which is meant for the knowledge of the Self.' Which are
they; This is being answered:
