+++
title = "15 शरीरवाङ्मनोभिर्यत्कर्म"

+++
18.15 Yat, whatever; karma, action; narah, a man; prarabhate, performs;
with these three-sarira-van-manobhih, with the body, speech and mind; be
it nyayyam, just, rigtheous, conforming to the scriptures; va, or;
viparitam, its reverse, not conforming to the scriptures, unrighteous;
and even such activities like closing the eyes etc. whch are conseent on
the fact of living (i.e. instinctive acts)-they also are certainly the
result of righteous and unrighteous acts done in earlier lives, and
hence they are understood by the very, use of the words 'just and its
reverse'-; tasya, of it, of all activities without exception; ete,
these; panca, five, as mentioned; are the hetavah, causes. Objection:
Well, are not the locus etc. the cause of all actions; Why is it said,
'৷৷.performs with the body, speech and mind'; Reply: This fault does not
arise. All actions described as 'enjoined' or 'prohibited' are mainly
based on the three, body etc. Seeing, hearing, etc., which are
characteristics of life and are subsidiaries to these (body etc.)
\[Seeing etc. are accomplished by the eye etc., which are part and
parcel of the body etc.\] , are divided into three groups and spoken of
in, 'performs with the body,' etc. Even at the time of reaping the
fruits (of actions), they are experienced mainly through these (three).
Hence, there is no contradiction with the assertion that the five are
the causes.
