+++
title = "16 तत्रैवं सति"

+++
18.16 Tatra is used for connecting with the topic under discussion.
Tatra evam sati, this being the case, when actions are thus accomplished
by the five causes mentioned above;-this portion has to be connected
with 'perverted intellect' by way of causality \[Actions are done by the
body etc., but since a person thinks that the Self is the agent,
therefore he is said to have a perverted intellect.\]-yah, tu, anyone,
an unenlightened person, who; pasyati, perceives; kevalam, the absolute,
pure; atmanam, Self; as the kartaram, agent-thinking, 'I myself am the
agent of the actions being done by them', as a conseence of imagining
the Self as identified with them; why;-akrta-buddhitvat, owing to the
imperfection of his intellect, owing to his intellect not having been
refined by the instructions of Vedanta and the teachers, and by
reasoning-. Even the person who, believing in the Self as distinct from
the body etc., looks upon the distinct \[Ast. omits anyam
(distinct).-Tr.\], absolute Self as the agent, he, too, is surely of
imperfect intellect. Hence, owing to his having an imperfect intellect,
sah, that man; na, does not; pasyati, perceive (properly) either the
truth about the Self or about actions. This is the meaning. Therefore he
is a durmatih, man of perverted intellect, in the sense that his
intellect is contemptible, perverse, corrupted, and the cause of
repeatedly undergoing births and deaths. He does not perceive even while
seeing-like the man suffering from Timira seeing many moons, or like one
thinking the moon to be moving when (actually) the clouds are moving, or
like the one seated on some conveyance (e.g. palanin), thinking oneself
to be moving when others (the bearers) are moving. Who, again, is the
man of right intellect who perceives correctly; This is being answered:
