+++
title = "17 यस्य नाहङ्कृतो"

+++
18.17 Yasya, he who, the person whose intellect is refined by the
instructions of the scriptures and the teachers, and reason; who has na,
not; ahankrtah bhavah, the feeling of egoism, in whom does not occur the
notion in the form, 'I am the agent'; i.e., he who sees thus: 'These
five, viz locus etc. (14), imagined in the Self through ignorance, are
verily the agents of all actions; not I. But I am the absolute,
unchanging witness of their functions, 'Without vita force, without
mind, pure, superior to the (other) superior immutable (Maya)" (Mu.
2.1.1)'; yasya, whose; buddhih, intellect, the internal organ, which is
the limiting adunct of the Self; is na, not; lipyate, tainted, does not
become regretful thinking, 'I have done this; as a result, I shall enter
into hell'; whose intellect does not become thus tainted, he has a good
intellect and he perceives (rightly). Api, even; hatva, by killing;
iman, these; lokan, creatures, i.e. all living beings; sah he; does not
hanti, kill-he does not perform the act of killing; nor does he
nibadhyate, become bound, nor even does he become connected with its
result, the fruit of an unrighteous action. Objection: Even if this be a
eulogy, is it not contradictory to say, 'even by killing he does not
kill'; Reply: This defect does not arise; for this becomes logical from
the ordinary and the enlightened points of view. By adopting the
empirical point of view (which consists in thinking), 'I am the slayer',
by identifying the body with the Self, the Lord says, 'even by killing';
and, by taking His stand on the supreme Truth as explained above (the
Lord says), 'he does not kill, nor does he become bound'. Thus both
these surely become reasonable. Objection; Is it not that the Self
certainly does act in combination with the locus etc., which conclusion
follows from the use of the word kevala (absolute) in the text, 'the
absolute Self as the agent' (16); Reply: There is not such fault,
because, the Self being changeless by nature, there is no possiblity of
Its becoming united with the locus etc. For it is only a changeful
entity that can possibly be united with another, or come to have
agentship through combination. But, for the changeless Self there can be
no combination with anything whatsoever. Hence, agentship through
combination is not logical. Therefore, the absoluteness of the Self
being natural, the word kevalam is merely a reiteration of an
established fact. And the changelessness of the Self is well known from
the Upanisads, the Smrtis and logic. As to that, in the Gita itself this
has been established more than once in such texts as, 'It is said
that৷৷.This is unchangeable' (2.25), 'Actions are being done by the
gunas themselves' (see 3.27), 'this ৷৷.supreme Self does not
act৷৷.although existing in the body' (13.31), and in the Upanisads also
in such texts as, 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were' (Br.
4.3.7). And from the standpoint of reason also, the royal path is to
hold that the true nature of the Self is that It is partless,
independent of others and changeless. Even if mutability (of the Self)
be accepted, It should have a change that is Its own. The functions of
the locus etc. cannot be attributed to the agency of the Self. Indeed,
an action done by someone else cannot be imputed to another by whom it
has not been done! As for what is imputed (on somody) through ignorance,
that is not his. As the ality of silver is not of nacre, or as surface
or dirt attributed through ignorance to the sky by foolish people is not
of the sky, similarly, the changes in the locus etc. also are verily
their own, and not of the Self. Hence it has been well said that the
enlightened person 'does not kill, nor is he bound', becuase of the
absence of his being tainted by the idea that actions are done by
himself. \[Some translate this portion thus: '৷৷.because of the absence
of the thought 'I am doing', and also due to the taintlessness of the
mind'; or, '৷৷.in the absence of egotism and of all taint in the
mind'.-Tr.\] After having declared, 'This One does not kill, nor is It
killed' (2.19); having stated the immutability of the Self through such
texts as, 'Never is this One born' (2.20) , etc., which adduce the
reason for this; having briefly stated at the commencement of the
Scripture-in, 'he who knows this One as indestructible' (2.21)-that the
enlightened man has no eligibility for rites and duties; and having
deliberated in various places on that (cessation) which has been mooted
in the middle (of the Scripture), the Lord, by way of summarizing the
purport of the Scripture, concludes here by saying that the enlightened
person 'does not kill, nor does he become bound.' If this be so, then it
becomes established that the three kinds of results of actions, viz the
undesirable etc., do not accrue to the monks, since it is reasonable
that, because of the illogicality of their entertaining the idea of
being embodied, all actions resulting from ignorance become abandoned
(by them). And hence, as a conseence of a reversal of this, it becomes
inevitable that the results do accrue to others. Thus, this is how the
purport of the scripture Gita has been summed up. In order that this
which is the essence of the teachings of all the Vedas should be.
understood after deliberation by the learned ones possessing a sharp
intellect, it has been explained by us in accordance with the scriptures
and reasoning, in various places by dealing with it topically.
Thereafter, now is being stated what promts actions:
