+++
title = "18 ज्ञानञ् ज्ञेयम्"

+++
18.18 Jnanam, knowledge (-being derived in the sense of 'that through
which something is known', jnana means knowledge concerning all things
in general-): so also jneyam, the object of knowledge (-that also is a
reference to all objects in general-); similarly, parijnata, the knower,
the experiencer, a product of ignorance, who partakes of the nature of
the limiting adjuncts;-thus, this tripartite group formed by these is
the trividha, threefold; karma-codana, inducement ot action, inducer of
all actions in general. For, it is when the three, viz knowledge etc.,
combine that commencement of all actions meant either for acceptance or
rejection \[Acceptance, rejection or indifference.\] are possible. After
that, what are initiated by the five, viz locus etc., and are grouped in
three ways according to the differences of their being based on speech,
mind and body become comprehended under the three, viz instrument etc.
This is what is being stated: Karma-sangrahah, the comprehension \[It is
well know that actions are based on the three-instrument etc.\] of
actions; iti, comes under; trividhah, three heads, three classes; viz
karanam, the instrument (-derived in the sense of that through which
anything is done-), i.e. the external (organs) (ear etc.) and the
internal (organs) (intellect etc.); karma, the object (-derivatively
meaning that which is most cherished by the subject and is achieved
through an act-); and karta, the subject (agent), who employs the
instrument etc., who partakes of the nature of the limiting adjuncts.
Sangrahah is derived thus: that in which something is comprehended. The
comprehension of action (karma) is karma-sangrahah. Indeed, action
becomes included in these three. Hence is this 'threefold comprehension
of action'. Now then, since action, instrument and result are all
constituted by the gunas, it becomes necessary to state the three fold
variety in them based on the differences among the gunas, viz sattva,
rajas and tamas. Hence it is begun:
