+++
title = "19 ज्ञानङ् कर्म"

+++
18.19 Jnanam, knowledge; karma, action-not the objective case in the
technical sense, which is defined as 'that which is most cheirshed by
the subject'; and karta, agent, the accomplisher of actions; procyate,
are stated; guna-sankhyane, in the teaching about the gunas, in the
philosophy of Kapila; to be eva, only (-only is used for emphasis, by
way of showing that they have no classification other than that based on
the gunas-); tridha, of three kinds; guna-bhedatah, according to the
differences of the gunas, i.e. according to the differences of sattva
etc. Even that philosophy teaching about the gunas is certainly vaild so
far as it concerns the experiencer of the gunas, though it is
contradictory so far as the non-duality of the supreme Reality, Brahman,
is concerned. Those followers of Kapila are acknoweldge authorities in
the ascertainment of the functions of the gunas and their derivatives.
Hence, that scripture, too, is being referred to by way of eulogy of the
subject-matter going to be spoken of. Therefore there is no
contradiction. Srnu, hear; tani, about them; api, also; yathavat, as
they are, as established by reason and as propounded in the scriptures.
Hear about knowledge etc. and all their diversities created by the
differences of the gunas. The idea is , 'Concentrate your mind on the
subject going to be taught.' And now the threefold classification of
knowledge is being stated:
