+++
title = "40 न तदस्ति"

+++
18.40 Na asti, there is no; tat, such; sattvam, entity, living creatures
like men and others, or non-living things; prthivyam, in the world; va
punah, or, again; an entity devesu, among the gods; divi, in heaven;
yat, which; syat, can be \[-this is connected with the preceding portion
'na tat, there is no such (entity)'-\]; muktam, free; hih, from these;
trubhih, three; gunaih, gunas, sattva etc.; prakrti-jaih, born of
Nature. It has been said that the entire transmigratory state together
with its roots, characterized by action, agent and resuls-consisting of
the gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas-, and projected by ignorance, is an
evil. And this also has been said through the imagery of the Tree in the
verse, '৷৷.which has its roots upward' etc. (15.1). It has been further
said that, 'after felling that (Tree), with the strong sword of
detachment, thereafter, that State has to be sought for' (15.3-4). And,
as to that, since all things consist of the three gunas, there arises
the impossibility of the eradication of the cause of worldly existence.
Hence, it has to be shown how it can be eradicated. Besides, the purport
of the scripture Gita has to be summed up, and it has also to be shown
that the import of all the Vedas and the Smrtis, which must be put into
practice by those who long for the Goal of human life, is verily this
much. Hence begin the verses, 'The duties of the Brahmanas, the
Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas৷৷.', etc.
