+++
title = "41 ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां"

+++
18.41 Parantapa, O scorcher of enemies; karmani, the duties;
brahmana-ksatriya-visam, of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the
Vaisyas; ca, as also; sudranam, of the Surdras-the Sudras have not been
included with the others (in the compund word) because, owing to their
having a single birth, \[Sudras have no right to be invested with the
sacred thread which, in the case of the other three castes, symbolizes a
second birth.\] they have no right to (the study of) the Vedas;
pravibhaktani, have been fully classified, have been prescribed by
making distinctions among them;-according to what;-gunahi, according to
the gunas; svabhava-prabhavaih, born from Nature. Nature means the
Praktrti of God, His Maya consisting of the three gunas. 'Born from
Nature' means 'born of these three gunas. In accordnace with these the
duties such as control of the internal organs, etc. of the Brahmanas and
others have been classified. Or (the meaning is): The source of the
nature of the Brahmanas is the ality of sattva. Similarly, the source of
the nature of the Ksatriyas is rajas, with sattva as a subordinate
(ality); the source of the nature of the Vaisyas is rajas, with tamas as
the subordinate (ality); the source of the nature of the Sudras is
tamas, with rajas as the subordinate (ality); for the natures of the
four are seen to be tranillity. lordliness, industriousness and dullness
respectively. Or, svabhava (nature) means the (individual) tendencies of
creatures earned in their past lives, which have become manifest in the
present life for yielding their own results. The gunas which have that
svabhava as their source (prabhava) are svabhava-prabhavah gunah. Since
the manifestation of the gunas cannot logically be uncaused, therefore a
specific cause \[i.e. the tendencies are the efficient cause, and Nature
is the material cause.\] has been posited by saying that Nature is the
cause. Thus, the duties such as control of the internal organs etc. have
been classified in keeping with the effects of the gunas, sattva, rajas
and tamas, which are born of Nature, born of Prakrti. Objection: Well,
are not the duties like controlling the internal organs etc. of the
Brahmanas and others classified and enjoined by the scriptures; Why is
it said that they are classified according to the gunas sattva etc.;
Reply: This objection is not valid. For, the duties like controlling the
internal organs etc. of the Brahmanas and others have been classified
even by the scriptures verily in keeping with the specific alities
sattva etc.; certainly, not without reference to the gunas. Hence,
though the duties have been divided by the scriputres, they are said to
have been classified according to the gunas. Which, again, are those
duties; They are being spoken of:
