+++
title = "48 सहजङ् कर्म"

+++
18.48 Kaunteya, O son of Kunti; na tyajet, one should not give
up;-what;-the karma, duty; sahajam, to which one is born, which devolves
from the very birth; api, even though; it be sadosam, faulty, consisting
as it is of the three gunas. Hi, for; sarva-arambhah, all undertakings
(-whatever are begun are arambhah, i.e. 'all actions', according to the
context-), being constituted by the three gunas (-here, the fact of
being constituted by the three gunas is the cause-); are avrtah,
surrounded; dosena, with evil; iva, as;; agnih, fire; is dhumena, with
smoke, which comes into being concurrently. One does not get freed from
evil by giving up the duty to which one is born-called one's own duty-,
even though (he may be) fulfilling somody else's duty. Another's duty,
too, is fraught with fear. The meaning is: Since action cannot be
totally given up by an unelightened person, therefore he should not
relinish it. Opponent: Well, is it that one should not abandon action
because it cannot be given up completely, or is it because evil \[Evil
resulting from discarding daily obligatory duties.\] follows from the
giving up of the duty to which one is born; Counter-objection: What
follows from this; Opponent: If it be that the duty to which one is born
should not be renounced because it is impossible to relinish it totally,
then the conclusion that can be arrived at is that complete renunciation
(of duty) is surely meritorious! Counter-objection: Truly so. But, may
it not be that total relinishment is itself an impossibility; Is a
person ever-changeful like the gunas of the Sankhyas, or is it that
action itself is the agent, as it is in the case of the momentary five
\[Rupa (from), vedana (feeling), vijnana (momentary consciousness),
sanjna (notion), samskara (mental impressions)-these have only momentary
existence. In their case there can be no distinction between action and
agent, simply due to the fact of their being momentary.\] forms of
mundane consciousness propounded by the Buddhists; In either case there
can be no complete renunciation of action. Then there is also a third
standpoint (as held by the Vaisesikas): When a thing acts it is active,
and inactive when that very thing does not act. If this be the case
here, it is possible to entirely give up actions. But the speciality of
the third point of view is that a thing is not ever-changing, nor is
action itself the agent. What then; A nonexistent action originates in
an existing thing, and an existing action gets destroyed. The
thing-in-itself continues to exist along with its power (to act), and
that itself is the agent. This is what the followers of Kanada say.
\[Their view is that agentship consists in 'possessing the power to
act', not in being the substratum of action.\] What is wrong with this
point of view. Vedantin: The defect indeed lies in this that, this veiw
is not in accord with the Lord's view. Objection: How is this known;
Vedantin: Since the Lord as said, 'Of the unreal there is no being৷৷.,'
etc. (2.16). The view of the followers of Kanada is, indeed, this that
the non-existent becomes existent, and the existent becomes nonexistent.
Objection: What defect can there be if it be that this view, even though
not the view of the Lord, yet conforms to reason; Vedantin: The answer
is: This is surely faulty since it contradicts all valid evidence.
Objection: How; Vedantin: As to this, if things like a dvyanuka (dyad of
two anus, atoms) be absolutely nonexistent before origination, and after
origination continue for a little while, and again become absolutely
non-existent, then, in that acase, the existent which was verily
nonexistent comes into being, \[Here Ast. adds, 'sadeva asattvam
apadyate, that which is verily existent becomes nonexistent'.-Tr.\] a
non-entity becomes an entity, and an entity becomes a non-entity! If
this be the view, then the non-enity that is to take birth is comparable
to the horns of a hare before it is born, and it comes into being with
the help of what are called material (inherent), non-mateial
(non-inherent) and efficient causes. But it cannot be said that
nonexistence has origination in this way, or that it depends on some
cause, since this is not seen in the case of nonexistent things like
horns of a hare, etc. If such things as pot etc. which are being
produced be of the nature of (potentially) existing things, then it can
be accepted that they originate by depending on some cause which merely
manifests them. \[According to Vedanta, before origination a thing, e.g.
a pot, remains latent in its material cause, clay for instance, with its
name and form unexpressed, and it depends on other causes for the
manifestation of name and form.\] Moreover, if the nonexistent becomes
existent, and the existent becomes non-existent, then nobody will have
any faith while dealing with any of the means of valid knowledge objects
of such knowledge, because the conviction will be lacking that the
existent is existent and the nonexistent is nonexistent! Further, when
they speak of origination, they (the Viasesikas) hold that such a thing
as a dvyanuka (dyad) comes to have relationship with its own (material)
causes (the two atoms) and existence, and that it is nonexistent before
origination; but later on, depending on the operation of its own causes,
it becomes connected with its own causes, viz the atoms, as also with
existence, through the inherent (or inseparable) relationship called
samavaya. After becoming connected, it becomes an existent thing by its
inherent relationship with its causes. \[The effect (dyad) has inherent
relationship with existence after its material causes (the two atoms)
come into association.\] It has to be stated in this regard as to how
the nonexistent can have an existent as its cuase, or have relationship
with anything. For nobody can establish through any valid means of
knowledge that a son of a barren woman can have any existence or
relationship or cause. Vaisesika: Is it not that relationship of a
non-existent thing is not at all established by the Vaisesikas; Indeed,
what is said by them is that only existent entities like dvyanuka etc.
have the relationship in the form of samavaya with their own causes.
Vedantin: No, for it is not admitted (by them) that anything has
existence before the (samavaya) relationship (occurs). It is surely not
held by the Vaisesikas that a pot etc. have any existence before the
potter, (his) stick, wheel, etc. start functioning. Nor do they admit
that clay itself takes the shape of a pot etc. As a result, it has to be
admitted (by them) as the last aternative that nonexistence itself has
some relationship! Vaisesika: Well, it is not contradictory even for a
nonexistent thing to have the relationship in the form of inherence.
Vedantin: No, because this is not seen in the case of a son of a barren
woman etc. If the antecedent nonexistence (prag-abhava) of the pot etc.
alone comes into a relationship with its own (material) cause, but not
so the nonexistence of the son of a barren woman etc. though as
nonexistence both are the same, then the distinction between the (two)
nonexistences has to be explained. Through such descriptions ( of
abhava, nonexistence) as nonexistence of one, nonexistence of two,
nonexistence of all, antecedent nonexistence, nonexistence after
destruction, mutual nonexistence and absolute non-existence, nobody can
show any distinction (as regards nonexistence itself)! There being no
distinction, (therefore, to say that:) 'it is only the "antecedent
nonexistence" of the pot which takes the form of the pot through the
(action of) the potter and others, and comes into a relationship with
the existing pot-halves which are its own (material) causes and becomes
fit for all empirical processes \[Such as production, destruction,
etc.\] but the "nonexistence after destruction" of that very pot does
not do so, though it, too, is nonexistence. Hence, the "nonexistence
after destruction", etc. \[Etc. stands for 'mutual nonexistence
(anyonya-abhava)' and 'absolute nonexistence (atyanta-abhava)'.\] are
not fit for any empirical processes, whereas only the "antecedent
nonexistence" of things called dvyanuka etc. is fit for such empirical
processes as origination etc.'-all this is incongruous, since as
nonexistence it is indistinguishable, as are 'absolute nonexistence' and
'nonexistence after destruction'. Vaisesika: Well, it is not at all said
by us that the 'antecedent nonexistence' becomes existent. Vedantin: In
that case, the existent itself becomes existent , as for instance, a
pot's becoming a pot, or a cloth's becoming a cloth. This, too, like
nonexistence becoming existent, goes against valid evidence. Even the
theory of transformation held by the Sankhyas does not differ from the
standpoint of the Vaisesikas, since they believe in the origination of
some new attribute \[i.e. in the origination of a transformation that
did not exist before.\] and its destruction. Even if manifestation and
disappearance of anything be accepted, yet there will be contradiction
with valid means of knowledge as before in the explanation of existence
or nonexistence of manifestation and disappearance. Hery is also refuted
the idea that origination etc. (of an effect) are merely particular
states of its cuase. As thelast alternative, it is only the one entity
called Existence that is imagined variously through ignorance to be
possessed of the states of origination, destruction, etc. like an actor
(on a stage). This veiw of the Lord has been stated in the verse, 'Of
the unreal there is no being৷৷.' (2.16). For, the idea of existence is
constant, while the others are inconstant. Objection: If the Self be
immutable, then how does the 'renunciation of all actions' become
illogical; Vedantin: If the adjuncts (i.e. body and organs) be real or
imagined through ignorance, in either case, action, which is their
attribute, is surely superimposed on the Self through ignorance. From
this point of view it has been said that an unenlightened person is
incapable of totally renouncing actions even for a moment (cf. 3.5). The
enlightened person, on the other hand, can indeed totally renounce
actions when ignorance has been dispelled through Illumination; for it
is illogical that there can (then) remain any trace of what has been
superimposed through ignorance. Indeed, no trace remains of the two
moons, etc. superimposed by the vision affected by (the disease called)
Timira when the desease is cured. This being so, the utterance, 'having
given up all actions mentally' (5.13), etc. as also, 'Being devoted to
his own duty' (45) and 'A human being achieves 'success by adoring Him
through his own duties (46), becomes justifiable. What was verily spoken
of as the success arising from Karma (-yoga), characterized as the
fitness for steadfastness in Knowledge,-the fruit of that (fitness),
characterized as 'steadfastness in Knowledge' consisting in the
perfection in the form of the state of one (i.e. a monk) free from
duties, has to be stated. Hence the (following) verse is begun:
