+++
title = "49 असक्तबुद्धिः सर्वत्र"

+++
18.49 Asakta-buddhih, he whose intellect, the internal organ, remains
unattached; sarvatra, to everything, with regard to son, wife and others
who are the cuases of attachment; jitatma, who has conered his internal
organs; and vigata-sprhah, who is desireless, whose thirst for his body,
life and objects of enjoyment have been eradicated;-he who is such a
knower of the Self, adhigaccahti, attains; sannyasena, through
monasticism, through perfect knowledge or through renunciation of all
actions preceded by this knowledge; the paramam, supreme, most
excellent; naiskarmya-siddhim, perfection consisting in the state of one
free from duties. One is said to be free from duties from whom duties
have daparted as a result of realizing that the actionless Brahman is
his Self; his state is naiskarmyam. That siddhi (perfection) which is
this naiskarmya is naiskarmya-siddhi. Or, this phrase means 'achievement
of naiskarmya', i.e., achievement of the state of remaining established
in one's own real nature as the actionless Self-which is different from
the success arising from Karma (-yoga), and is of the form of being
established in the state of immediate Liberation. Accordingly has it
been said, '৷৷.having given up all actions mentally,৷৷.without doing or
causing (others) to do anything at all' (5.13). The stages through which
one who has attained success-which has the aforesaid characteristics and
which arises from the performance of one's own duties mentioned earlier
as worship of God-, and in whom has arisen discriminative knowledge,
achieves perfection-in the form of exclusive adherence to Knowledge of
the Self and consisting in the state of one free from duties-have to be
stated. With this is view the Lord says:
