+++
title = "50 सिद्धिम् प्राप्तो"

+++
18.50 Nibodha, understand for certain; me, from Me, from My utterance-.
Is it elaborately; The Lord says, no, samasena, in brief; eva, indeed, O
son of Kunti, how siddhim praptah, one who has achieved success, one
who, by worshipping God through one's duties, has achieved success in
the form of fitness of the body and organs for steadfastness in
Knowledge, which comes from His grace; (-the reiteration of the phrase
siddhim praptah is meant for introducing what follows; what is that
succeeding subject for which this reiteration stands is being answered:)
yatha tatha, that process by which, that process in the form of
steadfastness in Knowledge, by which that process of aciring
steadfastness in Knowledge by which; apnoti, attains; brahma, Brahman,
th supreme Self-. In order to point out-as 'It is this'-the realization
of Brahman which was promised in, 'that process by which one৷৷.attains
Brahman,' the Lord says; ya, which; is the para, supreme; nistha,
consummation, i.e. the supreme culmination; jnanasya, of Knowledge. Of
what; Of the knowledge of Brahman. Of what kind is it; It is of the same
kind as the realization of the Self. Of what kind is that; As is the
Self. Of what nature is It; As has been described by the Lord and the
Upanisadic texts, and established through reason. Objection: Is it not
that knowledge takes the form of its object; But it is not admitted
anywhere that the Self is an object, or even that It has form.
Pseudo-Vedantin: Is it not heard of in such texts as, 'radiant like the
sun' (Sv. 3.8), 'Of the nature of effulgence' (Ch. 3.14.2) and
'Self-effulgent' (Br. 4.3.9), that the Self has form; Objection: No,
because those sentences are meant for refuting the idea that the Self is
of the nature of darkness. When the Self is denied of possessing forms
of substance, ality, etc., the contingency arises of the Self's being of
the nature of darkness. The sentences, 'radiant like the sun,' etc. are
meant for ruting this. And this follows from the specific denial of from
by saying, 'Formless' (Ka. 1.3.15), and from such texts as, 'His form
does not exist within the range of vision; nobody sees Him with the eye'
(Ka. 2.3.9: Sv. 4.20), 'soundless, touchless' (ka. 1.3.15), etc. which
show that the Self is not an object of perception. Therefore it remains
unproved that there can be any knowledge which takes the form of the
Self. How, then, can there be the knowledge of the Self; For, all
knowledge that there can be with regard to objects assumes their
respective forms. And it has been said that the Self has no form.
Moreover, if both knowledge and the Self be formless, then how can there
be the consummation \[Firmness in Self-realization.\] of the (repeated)
contemplation on that (knowledge of the Self); Vedantin: No. Since it
can be established that the Self is supremely taintless, pure and
subtle, and it can also be established that the intellect can have
taintlessness etc. like the Self, therefore it stands to reason that the
intellect can take a form resembling the consciousness of the Self. The
mind becomes impressed with the semblance of the intellect; the organs
become impressed with the semblance of the mind; and the body becomes
impressed with the semblance of hte organs. Hence it is that the idea of
the body itself being the Self is held by ordinary people. The
Lokayatikas (materialists), who hold that the body is identical with
consciousness, say that a person is a body endowed with consciousness;
so also there are others who say that the organs are identical with
consciousness; there are others who say that the mind is identical with
consciousness, and still others who say that the intellect is identical
with consciousness. Some accept as the Self the Unmanifest \[The inmost
Ruler (antaryamin), possessing a semblance of Consciousness.\], called
the Undifferentiated, which is more internal than that (intellect) and
is within the domain of (primordial) ignorance. Indeed, in every case,
beginning from the intellect to the body, the cause of mis-conceived
Selfhood is the semblance of the Consciousness that is the Self. Hence,
knowledge about the Self is not a subject for injunction. What then;
Only the eradication of the superimposition of name, form, etc., which
are not the Self, is what has to be undertaken, but not the knowledge of
the Self that is Consciousness. For it is the Self which is experienced
as possessed of the forms of all the various objects that are
superimposed (on It) through ignorance. It is evidently because of this
that the Buddhists who uphold the view of (momentary) consciousness have
concluded that there is no substance at all apart from (momentary)
consciousness, and that it is not in need of any other valid proof since
they hold that it is self-cognized. Therefore, what is to be undertaken
is only the elimination of the superimposition on Brahman through
ignorance, but no effort is needed for knowing Brahman (Consciousness),
for It is ite self-evident! It is because the intellect is distracted by
particular appearances of name and form imagined through ignorance that
Brahman, even though self-evident, easily realizable, nearer than all
else and identical with oneself, appears to be concealed, difficult to
realize, very far and different, But to those whose intellect has become
free from external appearances and who have obtained the grace of a
teacher and serenity of mind, there is nothing more blissful, manifest,
well known, easily realized and nearer to oneself than this Self. And
thus it has been declared, 'directly realizable, righteous,' etc. (9.2).
However, some wiseacres assert that the intellect cannot comprehend the
entity called the Self since It is formless; hence, complete
steadfastness in Knowledge is impossible. This is truly so for those who
have not associated with a traditional line of teachers; who have not
heard the Upanisads; whose intellects are too much engrossed with
external objects; and who have not applied themselves diligently to the
perfect means of knowledge. For those, on the other hand, who are the
opposite of these, it is absolutely impossible to have the idea of
reality with regard to empirical objects, which are within the realm of
duality involving the knower and the known, because in their case there
is no perception of any other thing apart from the Consciousness that is
the Self. We have already said how this is certainly so and not
otherwise. It has been stated by the Lord also, 'That during which
creatures keep awake, it is night to the seeing sage' (2.69). Therefore,
the cessation of the perception of differences in the form of external
things is alone the cause of resting in the reality of the Self. For,
that which is called the Self is never an object which is not well
known, attainable, rejectable or acceptable to anyone at any time. Were
that Self to be indeed not self-evident, all activities would become
meaningless. \[According to Ast. the latter portion of this sentence is:
svarthah sarvah pravrttayah vyarthah prasajyeran, all activities meant
for one's own benefit would become meaningless.-Tr.\]. For it cannot be
imagined that they could be undertaken for unconscious objects like the
body etc. Besides, it cannot be that pleasure is for pleasure's sake, or
that sorrow is for sorrow's sake. Moreover, all empirical dealings are
meant for culminating in the realization of the Self. \[According to
B.S. 3.4.26, 'On the strength of the Upanisadic sanction of sacrifices
etc. all religious activities as well are necessary৷৷.', sacrifices etc.
are meant for leading to the realization of the Self, without which they
would become meaningless.\] Therefore, just as for knowing one's own
body there is no need of any other (external) means of knowledge so also
there is no need of any other means of knowledge, for the realization of
the Self which is innermost (in relation to the body etc.). Hence it is
established that steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self is a fact
very well known to the discriminating people. Even to those who hold
that knowledge is formless and not cognized by direct perception,
cognition of an object is dependent on knowledge. Hence it has to be
admitted that knowledge is as immediate as pleasure etc. And this
follows also from the impossibility of a desire to know (knowledge). Had
knowledge been not self-evident, it could have been sought for like any
object of knowledge. And in that case, as \[This is Ast.'s reading;
others read tatha.-Tr.\] a knower seeks to perceive through knowledge
such objects of knowledge as pot etc., similarly the knower would have
sought to perceive knowledge through another knowledge! But this is not
the case. Therefore knowledge is ite self-revealing, and for the very
same reason the knower also is self-revealed. Hence, effort is not
needed for knowledge, but only for the removal of the notion of what is
not-Self. \[In place of anatma-buddhi-nivrttau, Ast. has 'anatmani
atma-buddhi-nivrttau, for the termination of thinking what is not the
Self as the Self'.-Tr.\] Conseently, steadfastness in Knowledge is easy
of accomplishment. It is being stated how this supreme consummation of
Knowledge is to be attained:
