+++
title = "54 ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा"

+++
18.54 Brahma-bhutah, one who has become Brahman, attained Brahman
through the above process; and prasanna-atma, \[Prasada means the
manifestation of the supreme Bliss of the Self as a result of the total
cessation of all evils. Prasanna-atma is one who has attained this in
the present life itself.\] has attained the blissful Self, the
indwelling Self; na, does not; socati, grieve-does not lament for the
loss of something or the lack of some ality in oneself; nor kanksati,
desire. By saying 'he does not grieve nor desire', this nature of one
who has attained Brahman is being restated. For it does not stand to
reason that in the case of a knower of Brahman there can be any
hankering for something unattained. Or, (in place of kanksati) teh
reading may be na hrsyati, does not become elated. Becoming samah, the
same; sarvesu bhutesu, towards all being-i.e., he verily judges what is
happiness and sorrow in all beings by the same standard as he would
apply to himself (cf. 6.32); but the meaning is not 'seeing the Self
alike in all beings', for this will be spoken of in (the next verse),
'Through devotion he knows Me'-; he, the one who is of this kind and
steadfast in Knowledge, labhate, attains; param, supreme; madbhaktim,
devotion to Me, to the supreme Lord; (he attains) devotion which is
described as Knowledge, as the 'fourth' in, '৷৷.four classes of
people৷৷.adore Me' (7.16). Then,
