+++
title = "55 भक्त्या मामभिजानाति"

+++
18.55 Bhaktya, through devotion, through that devotion described as
Knowledge; abhijanati, he knows; mam, Me; tattvatah, in reality; as to
yavan, what I am, with the extensive differences created by limiting
adjuncts; and yah asmi, who I am when all distinctions create by the
limiting adjuncts are destroyed-Me who am the supreme Person comparable
to space \[In points of all-pervasiveness and non-attachment.\] and
one-without-a-second, absolute, homogeneous Consciousness, birthless,
ageless, immortal, fearless and deathless. Tatah, then; jnatva, having
known; mam, Me, thus; tattvatah, in truth; visate, he enters into Me,
Myself; tadanantaram, immediately after that (Knowledge). Here, by
saing, 'having known, he enters without delay', it is not meant that the
acts of 'knowing' and 'entering immediately after' are different. What
then; What is meant is the absolute Knowledge itself that has to no
other result, \[In place of phalantarabhava-jnana-matram eva, Ast. reads
'phalantarbhavat jnanamatram eva, absolute Knowledge itself, since there
is no other result'.-Tr.\] for it has been said, 'And৷৷.understand Me to
be the "Knower of the field", (13.2). Opponent: Has it not been
contradictory to say, he knows Me through that which is the supreme
steadliness (nistha) in Knowledge; Vedantin: If it be asked, How it is
contradictory; Opponent: The answer is: Whenever any Knowledge of
something arises in a knower, at that very moment the knower knows that
object. Hence, he does not depend on steadfastness in Knowledge which
consists in the repetition of the act of knowing. And therefore, it is
contradictory to say one knows not through knowledge, but through
steadfastness in knowledge which is a repetition of the act of knowing.
Vedantin: There is no such fault, since the culmination of
Knowledge-which (Knowledge) is associated with the causes of its
unfoldment and maturity, and which has nothing to contradict it- in the
conviction that one's own Self has been realized is what is referred to
by the word nistha (consummation): When knowledge-which concerns the
identity of the 'Knower of the field' and the supreme Self, and which
remains associated with the renunciation of all actions that arise from
the perception of the distinction among their accessories such as agent
etc., and which unfolds from the instruction of the scriptures and
teachers, depending on purity of the intellect etc. and humility etc.
which are the auxiliary cuases of the origin and maturity of
Knowledge-continues in the form of the conviction that one's own Self
has been realized, then that continuance is called the supreme
steadfastness (nistha) in Knowledge. This steadfastness in Knowledge
that is such has been spoken of as the highest, the fourth kind of
devotion in relation to the three other devotions viz of the afflicted,
etc. (cf. 7.16). Through that highest devotion one realizes the Lord in
truth. Immediately after that the idea of difference between the Lord
and the Knower of the field vanishes totally. There-fore the statement,
'one knows Me through devotion in the form of steadfastness in
Knowledge', is not contradictory. And, in this sense, all the
scriptures-consisting of Vedanta (Upanisads etc.), History, Mythology
and Smrtis-, as for instance, 'Knowing (this very Self the Brahmanas)
renounce৷৷.and lead a mendicant's life' (Br. 3.5.1), 'Therefore they
speak of monasticism as excellent among these austerities' (Ma. Na.
24.1), 'Monasticism verily became supreme' (ibid. 21.2), which enjoin
renunciation become meaningful. Thus, monasticism means renunciation of
rites and duties. There are also the texts, 'Having renounced the Vedas
as well as this world and the next' (Ap. Dh. Su. 2.9.13), and 'Give up
religion and irreligion' (Mbh. Sa. 329.40; 331.44), etc. And here (in
the Gita) also various relevant) passages have been pointed out. In is
not porper that those texts should be meaningless. Nor are they merely
eulogistic, since they occur in their own contexts. Besides, Liberation
consists in being established in the changeless real nature of the
indwelling Self. Indeed, it is not possible that one who wants to go to
the eastern sea and the other who wants to go in the opposite direction
to the western sea can have the same course! And steadfastness in
Knowledg consists in being totally absorbed in maintaining a current of
thought with regard to the indwelling Self. And that is opposed to
coexistence with duties, like going to the western sea. It has been the
conclusion of those versed in the valid means of knowledge that the
difference between them is as wide as that between a mountain and a
mustard seed! Therefore it is established that one should have recourse
to steadfastness in Knowledge only, by relinishing all rites and duties.
The fruit of the attainment of success from the Yoga of Devotion
consisting in worshiping the Lord with one's own actions is the ability
to remain steadfast in Knowledge, from which, follows stead-fastness in
Knowledge, culminating in the result, Liberation. That Yoga of Devotion
to the Lord is now being praised in this concluding section dealing with
the purport of the Scripture, with a veiw to generating a firm
conviction with regard to it (the purport of the Scripture):
