+++
title = "67 इदन् ते"

+++
18.67 Idam, this Scripture; which has been taught by Me te, to you, for
your good, for terminating mundane existence; an vacyam, should not be
taught (-na is connected with the remote word vacyam-); atapaskaya, to
one who is devoid of austerities. It should kadacana, never, under any
condition whatsoever; be taught abhaktaya, to one who is not a devotee,
who is devoid of devotion to his teacher and God, even if he be a man of
austerity. Neither should it be taught even asurusave, to one who does
not redner service-even though he may be a devotee and a man of
austerity. Na ca, nor as well; to him yah, who; abhyasuyati, cavils;
mam, at Me, at Vasudeva-thinking that I am an ordinary person; to him
who, not knowing My Godhood, imputes self-adulation etc. to Me and
cannot tolerate Me. He too is unfit; to him also it should not be
imparted. From the force of the context it is understood that the
Scripture should be taught to one who has devotion to the Lord, is
austere, renders service, and does not cavil. As to that, since it is
seen (in a Smrti)-'to one who is intelligent or to one who is
austere'-that there is an option between the two, it follows that this
should be imparted either to an austere person given to service and
devotion, or to an intelligent person endowed with them. It should not
be imparted to an austere or even an intelligent person if he lacks
service and devotion. It should not be taught to one who cavils at the
Lord, even though he be possessed of all the good alities. And it should
be taught to one whoserves his teacher and is devout. This is the rule
for transmitting the Scripture. Now the Lord states the fruit derived by
one who transmits the Scripture:
