+++
title = "73 नष्टो मोहः"

+++
18.73 O Acyuta, (my) mohah, born of ignorance and the cause of all evil
in the form of mundane existence, and difficult to cross like an ocean;l
nastah has been destroyed. And smrtih, memory, regarding the reality of
the Self-on the acisition of which follows the loosening of all the
bonds; labdha, has been regained, tvat-prasadat, through Your grace
maya, by me, who am dependent on Your grace. By this estion about the
destruction of delusion and the answer to it, it becomes conclusively
revealed that the fruit derived from understanding the import of the
entire Scripture is this much alone-which is the destruction of delusion
arising from ignorance and the regaining of the memory about the Self.
And similarly, in the Upanisadic text beginning with 'I grieve because I
am not a knower of the Self' (Ch. 7.1.3), it is shown that all bonds
become destroyed when the Self is realized. There are also the words of
the Upanisadic verses, 'The knot of the heart gets untied' (Mu. 2.2.8);
'at that time (or to that Self) what delusion and what sorrow can there
be for that seer of oneness;' (Is.7). Now then, sthitah, asmi, I stand
under Your ;nd; gata-sandehah, with (my) doubts removed. Karisye, I
shall follow; tava, Your; vacanam, instruction. By Your grace I have
achieved the goal of life. The idea is, there is no duty, as such, for
me. The teaching of the Scripture is concluded. There-after, now in
order to show the connection (of this) with the (main) narrative-.
