+++
title = "07 तस्मात्सर्वेषु कालेषु"

+++
8.5-7 Antakale etc., upto asamsayam. At the time of departure also :
i.e., not only as longs as \[one is\] in the healthy and unmolested
condition. Me alone : Me, with all attributes undistinguished. But at
the time of unhealthy state (at the time of death) of a person, how
cloud the Bhagavat enter the path of his memory, when all the activities
of the senses of that person have totally ended ; Hence \[to achieve
this result the Lord\] teaches also the means or device by 'Therefore'
etc.: The Bhagavat surely, on His own accord, becomes \[even at the time
of death\] the object of memory of that person from whose heart (mind)
the Bhagavat has never gone away in any cirucumstance connected with the
mundane life also; who has \[thus\] renounced all his actions to the
Bhagavat alone; and who is full of (fully absorbed in) the Bhagavat. For
this end, the means is to remain constantly absorbed in the thought of
the Bhagavat. That is why He Says : 'With whatever object the internal
organ of a person is filled up always, that object alone is remembered
by him at the time of death, and the state of that being alone is
attained \[by him\]. Hence, let a person, by all means, have Me alone as
his goal and be desirous of attaining Me'. This is the idea here. The
idea \[intended here\] is certainly not 'What is remembered, without
fail, at the last moment that being alone is attained by him'. Because
in that case the attainment of the man of wisdom would also be just like
that of an ignorant man. For, the former too \[at the time of death\]
gets \[complete\] dulness of mind that is benumbed by the disorder (or
defect) of he elements existing in his entire body. Certainly it is not
proper to accept this here. For, it would go agains the authority of the
scriptures. For, the fact is- 'He who has attained liberation
simultaneously with realisation \[of the Self\], and whose sorrows
\[therefore\] have been destroyed - he attains completely unity \[with
the Absolute\] even though \[at the time of death\] he has lost his
memory and abandons his body in a sacred place or in the house of a
dog-cooker (i.e., man of a low tribe)'. (PS, 83). Therefore the
matter-of-fact statement (or explanation) and injunction \[that are
meant here\] are the following : If a person's internal organ is
absorbed incessantly in the thought of a particular being, the same
being is attained by him at end after departure. It is immaterial
whether \[at the time of departure\] that being is remembered or not.
This secondary importance \[of the remembrance\] is indicated by the
word api 'also'. The word va 'or' makes it clear that the rememberance
does not exist in each and every case. The Sage (Vyasa) himself
clarifies his idea 'Let a man always remain by all means keeping Me (the
Absolute Lord) as his supreme goal'. Since the Sage says : 'Therefore at
all times keep Me (the Absolute) in your mind'. Therefore, the following
is the combination of words \[of the verse intended here\] : If a
person, remembering always, or at the last moment - the use of or
denotes 'or not remembering \[at the last moment\]' - a particular
being, leaves his body, he attains that particular being alone. For, he
is always absorbed in the thought of that being. But others \[interpret
the verses as follows\] : When one leaves his body as the end, just at
the moment of leaving the body i.e., at that moment which is not
cognizable to the perceivers like relatives, sons etc. \[standing
nearby\]; at that moment that comes last after the limb-movements, like
\[heavy\] breathing, exertion, hiccup, convulsive utterance etc., \[have
endred\]; at that fraction of time when the bondage of pleasure, pain
and bewilderment is weakened as a result of the weakening of the control
of the bodily strength; at that time that goes by the term dehatyajana
'the moment of casting the body off'; at that moment whatsoever being a
person remembers, his nature becomes entriely identical with that being,
favoured (taken as an object) by the First Consiousness. the cause for
remembering \[the Lord\] at that moment is to remanin ever absorbed in
the thought of Him. The word tyajati \[of verse 6\] is to be construed
as the seventh case \[meaning 'at the time of abandoning'\]. Hence, the
purport \[of the passage\] is only what has been said above. What is the
use of such a remembrance of Him at the last moment ; But, who told that
\[there\] is a use \[for it\] ; But, the remembrance is certainly
brought about as a natural course at the last moment. But this
\[proposition\] would lead to an undersirable conseence. For, it has
been observed that a person \[usually\] remberances at the last moment
either the maintenance of his children, wife and relatives, or drinking
of cold water and so on. So, he would become identical with those
things. It is not so. The moment, you speak of, is not the last moment.
For, at that moment the existence of body is being clearly felt. Really
that last moment, which we would like to speak of, can't be perceived by
persons like you. In what form alone the remembrance should be there at
the last moment is decided by \[its cause\], a potential mental
impression certainly arising at that time - even though it is far off -
according to the general principle : 'The remembrance and the potential
mental impression \[that causes it\] being identical in form, there
should be a seential immediacy \[between them\], even though they are
removed \[from one another\] by many births, by long distance and by
long passage of time'. (YS, IV, 9). Thus, depending on the potential
mental impression, there arises remembrance of a particular being, and
becuase of its remembrance one attains the identity of that being.
However in the case of certain body the same \[process\] is accidentally
indicated even at the stage of healthy body-condition. See for example,
the remembrance of a deer etc., \[both in the healthy conditions and in
the dying moment\] and the conseential attainment of the deerhood, as
described in the Puranic literature. That is why api ca 'and also' is
employed in \[the statement\] like 'and also at the time of journey.'
Therefore, those who constantly think of the Bhagavat with intention
'Let us become this Being'; they attain \[in the following order\] the
identity with Absolute Lord, of the exclusive nature of Consciousness :
\[First\] there arises the thought (smarana) of the Lord at the moment
when the bodily existence is felt; then at that unperceivable last
moment the potential mental impression, born of the said thought, gives
rise to the remembrance of the Lord by striking down all the other
potential mental impressions, according to the principle : 'The
potential mental impression, born therefrom , make all other potential
mental impressions powerless (YS., I, 50). Then only at the moment of
the fall of the body, because at that time the mental impression created
by \[the sense of\] time has come to an end and because the differences
of the objects like 'this', 'that' etc., are not felt-at that moment he
attains identity with the Lord. This much of discussion is enough.
Without doubt (verse 7) : one should not entertain any doubt in this
regard.
