+++
title = "14 अनन्यचेताः सततम्"

+++
8.12-14 Sarvadvarani etc., upto Yoginah. The gates : the sense organs,
like the eyes and not the place of excrement etc. Restraining the mind
in the heart : By this, only the absence of attachment towards the
objects, and not any seat, is stated. One's own Prana : the driver of
one's own Self (the vital air). So, the meaning is 'Fixing this Prana in
the head i.e., the very Self with the Power-of-Will, lying beyond all
categories. Thus the controlling of body \[has been prescribed\].
Reciting Om : This denotes the act of controlling the sense of speech.
Meditating on Me : It signifies the non-wandering of the mind over other
objects. Whosoever travels well : Whosoever travels day after day not to
return back (i.e., for final emancipation). Therefore casting away the
body i.e., longing 'How to avoid taking once again the body, a
repository of all troubles', whosoever remembers Me always with his
mind, that thinks nothingelse-he reaches Me i.e., he realises My state.
Really the Sage (Vyasa) does not favour \[the idea of\] upward flight
\[of the Soul from the body\] that may go against the pronounced
intention of \[attaining\] total identity with the Absolute Brahman that
admits no duality. Therefore it has been said : 'If the Siva-existence
(the Absolute State) is Omnipresent, then the upward flight serves no
purpose indeed. On the othe hand, if Siva (the Absolute) is not
Omnipresent then the upward flight cannot yield Siva (the Auspicious
one, the Absolute)'. Alternately \[the Gita passage may be interpreted
as :\] If some persons have not undergone the process of constant
practice, yet at the time of death there arises \[in them\] - due to
some undefinable reason, like the Free Will of the Lord and the like-a
condition, similar to the one mentioned above, then \[in the case of
those persons\] this condition itself - characterised as 'the flight
from the body' (getting oneself disassociated from the body) - is stated
\[by the Sage\] as a means obstructing all the other potential mental
impressions. That is why in the passage starting 'That unchanging one
which the Veda-knowers speek of' and ending 'I shall tell you that',
\[the Sage\] has made a solemn declaration in order to explain the
astonishing nature of the reflection on the Bhagavat - even though it
lasts only a moment - marked by the destruction of all the \[other\]
potential mental impressions. Hence the great teachers also say : 'O
Sambhu ! If You could set Your foot, atleast for the duration of a
single winking of the eye, in \[my\] blemishless mind, what else would
You not accomplish \[for me\]'. That is why, with a view to satisfy
those who raise the estion 'But the breaking \[of body of the wise\] has
been found without remembrance \[of the Lord\] at the time of
departure', here it is said 'He who \[remembers Me\] constantly with the
mind, not attached to any other thing.' The meaning of it is : 'He whose
mind is not attached to any other result to be achieved.' For him I am
easy to attain : For him there is no need to undertake the trouble of
searching for a suitable time for departure; making pilgrimage to sacred
places; \[waiting for\] the time of the summer solastice; taking shelter
in the temples; augmenting the \[Strand\] Sattva; remaining absorbed in
the thought \[of the Lord\]; \[expecting\] the auspicious moment of
einox and of the day \[time\]; selecting a locality that is naturally
pure; having body free from dirt of attachment (or unguent); wearing
clean cloth; and similar other ones. Hence it has been stated earlier
\[under VIII, 5-7 above\] 'Either in a sacred place or in the house of a
dog-cooker' etc. But it has been declared that 'He attains My State.'
Will there he rirth for him even after attaining that State ;
Considering this doubt \[the Lord\] says :
