+++
title = "001 एवङ् गृहाश्रमे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-born accomplished student, having, in the afore- said manner, lived, according to law, the life of the householder, should dwell in the forest, in the proper manner, self-controlled and with his organs under subjection—(1).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गृहोपलक्षित आश्रमो **गृहाश्रमः**। गृहा दाराः । तत्र **स्थित्वा** तम् अनुष्ठाय, **वने वसेद्** इति विधिः । स्थित्वेति क्त्वाप्रत्ययेन पौर्वकाल्यं गार्हस्थ्यस्य वनवासाद् दर्शयति । क्रमेणाश्रमः कर्तव्यः । कृतगार्हस्थ्यो वनवासे ऽधिक्रियते । समुच्चयपक्षम् आश्रित्यैतद् उक्तम् । अन्यथाविप्लुतब्रह्मचर्याद् अपि वनवासो विद्यत इत्य् एतद् अपि वक्ष्यते । **विजितेन्द्रियः** पक्वकषायः क्षीणराग इत्य् अर्थः । एवं **विधिवद् यथावद्** इतिपदानि वृत्तपूरणानि । तानि प्राक् तत्र तत्र व्याख्यातानि । एतावद् विधीयते । गार्हस्थ्यं कृत्वा वनवास आश्रयितव्यः ॥ ६.१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*gṛhāśrama*’ means that ‘*āśrama*’, *life-stage* which is
characterised by the ‘*gṛha*’, *house*,—*i.e*., the *presence of the
wife*.

Having ‘*lived*’ there,—*i.e*., having duly fulfilled the duties of that
stage of life—he should dwell in, the forest. This is the injunction
here set forth.

The affix in ‘*sthitvā*’, ‘having lived’, indicates the priority of the
Householder’s life to that of the Hermit; and the meaning is that one
should proceed from, stage to stage in the right order; it is only one
who has lived the Householder’s life that is entitled to the forest-life
of the Hermit.

What is said here is in accordance with the view that a man should pass
through each and all the four stages. There is however the other view
that from the life of the purely celebate student also one can proceed
at once to the forest-life; as is going to be described later on.

‘*With* *his* *organs under subjection* ’—with his impurities washed
off, his passions calmed down.

The phrases ‘*according to law*’ and ‘*in the proper manner*’ have been
added only for the purpose of filling up the metre; as we have already
explained in several places.

All that is meant to be enjoined here is that ‘having completed the
Householder’s life, he shall betake himself to the life in the
forest.’—(1).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Niyataḥ*’—‘Taking a firm resolution’ (Govindarāja and
Kullūka);—‘devoted to the duties, austerities, reciting the Veda and so
forth’ (Nārāyaṇa).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6.1-2)  
**

*Gautama* (3.1).—‘Some people declare that he who has studied the Veda
may make his choice regarding the particular stage that he will enter.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.11.14).—‘A hermit is one who regulates his conduct
according to the institutes proclaimed by Vikhānas.’

*Āpastamba* (2.21.1-2, 18-10).—‘There are four stages—that of the
Householder, that of the Student, that of the Renunciate and that of the
Hermit. If he lives in all these four according to the law, without
allowing himself to he disturbed, he will obtain salvation. Only after
completing studentship shall he go forth as a Hermit.’

*Āpastamba*. (2.22.78).—‘After having finished the study of the Veda,
having taken a wife and kindled the sacred fires, he shall begin the
rites ending with the Soma-sacrifices, performing as many as are
prescribed in the Veda:—afterwards he shall build a dwelling outside the
village and dwell there with his children and wife.’

*Āpastamba* (2.21.8).—‘After having fulfilled the duties of the Student,
he shall go forth as a Renunciate.’

*Āpastamba* (2.24.14).—‘He may accomplish his objects as he pleases;
there is no reason to place any one order before the other.’

*Viṣṇu* (94.1-2).—‘A householder, when he sees his skin wrinkled and his
hair turned grey, must go to live in a forest; or when he sees the son
of his son.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.45).—‘Entrusting his wife to his sons, or accompanied
by his wife, the Hermit, taking the vow of celibacy, shall repair to the
forest, along with his tires and the *Upāsanās*.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 940).—‘Having lawfully begotten children, having
performed the sacrifices to the best of his ability, and having seen his
son’s child, the Brāhmaṇa shall repair to the forest.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do.).—‘Having begotten children, having performed
their sacraments, taught them the Veda, provided them with the means of
living, united them to their wives, entrusting his family to his son,
and making preparations for departure, he should have recourse to
special means of livelihood. In due course, after having passed through
the *Yāyāvara* stage, he should repair to the forest.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘faking with himself the sacrificial implements, the
sacred fire, the cows and other accessories, and accompanied by his
wife, the twice-born man shall repair to the forest.’

*Jābāla* (Parāśaramādhava, Ācāra, p. 525).—‘Having completed religious
studentship, one shall become a Householder; after having become a
House-holder, he shall go out.’

*Chāgalega* (Do., p. 526).—‘Being without his wife, he shall deposit his
fire in himself, and the Brāhmaṇa shall go out of his house.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.2-5)—‘Some teachers say that he who has finished his
studentship may become a renunciate immediately on the completion of
that; hut according to others, renunciation is fit only for those
*Śālīnas* and *Yāyāvaras* who are childless, or a widower; in general
they prescribe renunciation after the completion of the seventieth year,
after the children have been finally settled in their sacred duties.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (7.1-3).—‘There are four orders: the Student, the
Householder, the Hermit and the Renunciate; a man who has studied one,
two or three Vedas without violating the rules of studentship may enter
any of these, whichsoever he pleases.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.27-28).—‘The duties of the Hermit are to keep matted
hair, to perform Agnihotra, to sleep on the bare ground, to wear black
deer-skin, to live in solitary places, to sustain himself on water,
succulent roots, Nīvāra corn and fruits, to refuse alms, to bathe
thrice, to observe vows and to adore gods and guests.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	A twice-born Snataka, who has thus lived according to the law in the order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and keeping his organs in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing the rules given below).
</details>
