+++
title = "032 आसाम् महर्षिचर्याणाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having discarded his body by one of these methods adopted by the Great Sages, the Brāhmaṇa, with sorrow and fear departed, becomes exalted in the region of Brahman.—(32).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वोक्तानि तपांसि महाप्रस्थानं चानन्तरोक्तं **महर्षिचर्या** । **आसाम् अन्यतमया** नदीप्रवेशेन भृगुप्रपतनेनाग्निप्रवेशेनाहारनिवृत्त्या वा शरीरं त्यजेत् । अस्य फलं **वीतशोकभयस्य** **ब्रह्मलोक**प्राप्तिः । नरकादिदुःखानुभवः शोकः । भयं नरकं गमिष्यामीति । तद् अस्य व्येति । अव्यवधानेनैव, नार्चिरादिक्रमेण, ब्रह्मलोकं प्राप्नोति । इह स्थानविशेषो ब्रह्मलोकः, स्वर्गाद् अपि निरतिशयस् तत्र **महीयते** पूज्यमान आस्ते । न तु ब्रह्मणः स्वाराज्यं प्राप्नोति, लोकग्रहणात् । चतुर्थे ह्य् आश्रमे मोक्षं वक्ष्यति । 

- न केवलकर्मकृतो मोक्ष <u>इत्य् आहुः</u> ।

- <u>ननु</u> चास्याप्य् उक्तम् "विविधाश् चौपनिषदीर् आत्मसंसिद्धये स्रुतीः" (म्ध् ६.२९) इति । आत्मसंसिद्धिश् च आत्मोपासनतया तद्भावापत्तिः । न ह्य् अन्यः संसिद्धिशब्दस्यार्थ उपपद्यते । औपनिषदीषु श्रुतिषु तद्भाव्यं योगिनाम् आत्मानम् "ब्रह्मसंश्थो ऽमृतत्वम् एति" (छु २.२३.१) इति च । अथ सायुज्यं गच्छतीत्यादि (छु २.२०.२) ।

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । अन्या अपि तपःसिद्धयः श्रूयन्ते । "स यदि पितृलोककामो[^९] भवति" (छु ८.२.१) इत्यादि संकल्पितार्थोपपादिता सार्ष्टिता सालोक्यं च पुरुषस्य भविष्यति । न पुनर् मोक्ष इति । 


[^९]:
     M G 1st ed.: pitṛlokavāso; G 2nd ed.: pitṛlokavāso kāmo

- <u>तद् अयुक्तं</u> विशेषाभावात् । यथैव परिमितफलासूपासनास्व् अधिक्रियते एवम् अमृतत्वप्राप्ताव् अपि । न क्वचिच् छ्रूयते परिव्राजकेनैवोपासनान्य् अद्वैतविषयाणि कर्तव्यानि ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "त्रयो धर्मस्कन्धाः" इत्य् उपक्रम्य "यज्ञो ऽध्ययनं दानम्" (छु २.२३.१) इत्य् अनेन गृहस्थधर्मा उक्ताः । "तप एव" इत्य् अनेन वानप्रस्थः । "ब्रह्मचार्य् आचार्यकुलवासी" इत्य् अनेन नैष्ठिकः । "ब्रह्मसंस्थः" इत्य् अनेन परिव्राजकः । एतेषां त्रयाणां पुण्यलोका उक्ताः । पारिशेष्याद् एतद्व्यतिरिक्तस्यामृतत्वम् ।

- <u>नैवम्</u> । ब्रह्मणि संतिष्ठते प्रयतते तत्परस्य ब्रह्मसंस्थस्य यौगिकत्वाद् अस्य शब्दस्य । 

- <u>ननु</u> च यदि सर्वेषाम् अधिकारस् तदैतावद् एव वक्तव्यम् "ब्रह्मसंस्थो ऽमृतत्वम् एति" (छु २.२३.१) इति ।

- <u>नैवम्</u> । आश्रमाणां स्वविधिवाक्यावगतं फलं संपत्क्षयिणः "पुण्यलोका भवन्ति" ति ब्रह्मसंस्थस्य तदाश्रमावस्थितस्यैवामृतत्वम् अपुनरावृत्तिलक्षणं विधीयते । 

- <u>ननु</u> चाद्वैतरूपं ब्रह्मेत्य् आत्मविदः । स च निवृत्तकर्माख्यः । आश्रमाश् च प्रवृत्तमार्गाख्याः क्रियाकारकफलभेदानुष्ठानात्मकाः । तत्राद्वैतात्मविज्ञाने समानभेदाश्रयाणि च गृहस्थाद्यग्निहोत्रकर्मादीनीति परस्परविरोधः ।

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । समानम् एतत् पारिव्राज्ये ऽपि यमनियमानाम् इष्टत्वात् ते च भेदाश्रयाः ।

- <u>अथाप्य्</u> उच्येत कर्मसंन्यासिनो निवृत्तिमार्गावस्थायिनो नैव केचिच् छास्त्रार्थविधयः सन्ति । 

- <u>नायं</u> शास्त्रार्थः । अहंकारममकारत्याग एव संन्यासो वक्ष्यते, नाशेषशास्त्रार्थत्यागः । तस्यापि क्षुधाद्युपहतस्य भिक्षादौ प्रवर्तमानस्यास्त्य् एव क्रियाकारकसंबन्धः । तत्र लौकिके दृष्टार्थभेदे प्रवर्तमानस्य अद्वैतात्मविज्ञानभावनम् अविरुद्धम्, शास्त्रीय त्व् अग्निहोत्रादौ विरोधाद् इति को युक्तकार्य् एवं वदेत् ।

- <u>अथोच्यते</u> । क्षुधाद्युपहतस्याप्य् अद्वैतत्यागो विरोधिना भोजनेन तावत्काल एव । यथान्धतमसि चलितस्य गच्छतः कण्टकप्रदेशे पादन्यासः सवितरि पुनर् उदिते लब्धप्रकाशस्य पुनर् न्याय्यम् एवाध्वन्यस्याकण्टके ऽवस्थानम् । तथा क्षुधाद्युपघाते विच्छिन्नात्मविज्ञानस्य क्षणम् आलोकस्थानीयायां क्षुन्निवृत्तौ पुनर् दृढसंस्कारवशाद् अद्वैत एवावस्थानम् इति ।

- <u>तत् तापसे</u> ऽप्य् अविरुद्धम् । गृहस्थस्यापि पुत्रदारादितयोपासनम् अविरुद्धम् । बहुव्यापारतस् तु भेदसात्म्यतां गतस्य कुतो ऽद्वैतसंस्कारोत्पत्तिः । उक्तं च गृहस्थधर्मेषु "एकाकी चिन्तयेत्" (म्ध् ४.२५८) इति । तथा "पुत्रे सर्वं समासज्य" (म्ध् ४.२५७) इति ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "तस्माद् उ ह न पुरायुषः स्वः कामी प्रेयात्" (श्ब् १०.२.६.७) इति श्रुतिः । तत्र कुतो वानप्रस्थस्य शरीरत्यागः । न हि सा श्रुतिर् वानप्रस्थाद् अन्यत्रानया स्मृत्या विषय उपस्थापयितुं शक्यते । बलीयसी हि श्रुतिः । सा च स्मृत्यनुरोधेन न संकोचम् अर्हति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । जरसा विशीर्णस्यानिष्टसंदर्शनादिना वा विदिते प्रत्यासन्ने मृत्यौ मुमूर्षतो न श्रुतिविरोधः । एवं हि तत्र श्रूयते "न पुरायुषः" इति । अवस्थाविशेषे ह्य् अनभिप्रेते मरणे एतावद् एवावक्ष्यत् "न स्वः कामी प्रेयात्" इति । अरिष्टोपदेशश् चोपनिषत्स्व् एवम् अर्थवान् भवति । यस्य त्व् एतन्निमित्तं मरणं नास्ति ॥ ६.३२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The austerities spoken of above and the ‘Grand Journey’ just spoken of
constitute ‘*the methods adopted by the Great Sages*.’ By ‘*one of
these*’—by drowning in a river, by falling from a precipice, by burning
one self by fire, by starving one’self to death—one should discard his
body.

The result of this is that ‘with sorrow and fear departed’ he reaches
the regions of Brahman. ‘*Sorrow*’ consists in the experiencing of the
sufferings of hell, etc.,—^(‘)*Fear*’—of going to hell. Both these
disappear for the man; and directly—not having to pass through the
several stages of Light, etc.—he goes to the region of Brahman.

The ‘*region of Brahman*’ is a particular place, superior than Heaven
itself; and in that ‘*he becomes exalted*’—remains to honoured. This
does not mean that he obtains the ‘Selfsovereignty’ of Brahman; since
the text distinctly adds the term ‘region’; specially as Liberation is
going to be spoken as being led to from the *fourth* Life-stage.

They say that Liberation is not attained by mere Action.

But this is not right; since in this very work it has been said—‘he
should study the Vedic texts contained in the Upaniṣads in order to
attain the Self’; and ‘attainment of the Self’ is nothing more than
*meditating*,’ *upon the Self and thereby becoming absorbed in it*;
there can be no other meaning of the term ‘attain’. And further what is
to be meditated upon by *yogins* in connection with the Upaniṣad-texts
is the Self:—‘One fixed in Brahman reaches immortality’, ‘he becomes
absorbed therein’ and so forth.

It might be argued that—“there are other forms of success proceeding
from austerities, spoken of in such texts as ‘if he is desirous of
reaching the regions of the Pitṛs etc. etc.’; wherein we find it stated
that man can attain that degree of greatness which belongs to Brahman,
and which is acquired by his determined activity; but this cannot be
*Liberation*.”

But this is not right. Because there is no distinction made. The man of
action is just as much entitled to ‘Immortality’ (which is Liberation)
as to the forms of worship leading to inferior results. It is nowhere
declared that those forms of worship which relate to Non-duality shall
be followed by the *Renunciate only*.

“But, having declared that ‘there are three departments of *Dharma*’,
the Upaniṣad (Chāndogya) names ‘sacrifice, study and charity’, which
represent the duties of the Householder; then it mentions ‘austerity’
which refers to the Hermit; then it speaks of the^(‘)Student dwelling in
the Teacher’s house’, which refers to the Life-long Student; and lastly
it mentions ‘one who is fixed in Brahman’, and this refers to the
Renunciate. Further on, it declares that the former three lead to
‘sacred regions’; from which it follows that it is the remaining fourth,
the Renunciate, who attains Immortality.”

Not so at all; the term ‘*brahmasaṃstha*’, ‘fixed in Brahman’, is used
in its literal sense of ‘one who is given up to meditating upon Brahman’
\[and this has no reference to any particular stage of life\].

“If all men were equally entitled to it, then all that the Upaniṣad need
have said is ‘one who is fixed in Brahman reaches Immortality’ \[and
nothing need have been said regarding the three life-stages\]”.

Not so; what the passage means is that,—‘the several life-stages lead to
sacred regions, which constitutes the result mentioned in connection
with the Injunctions relating to the stages; but if, *while still in the
same stages*, if a man fixes himself upon Brahman, he attains
*Immortality*, which means *non-return to birth*.’

“Those who know the Self have declarered that Brahman is non-dual; and
It is also called ‘one in whom all activity has ceased’; the Life-stages
on the other hand, all constitute the path of activity, consisting of
the performance of various acts leading up to various results; so that
there is a clear incompatibility between the ‘knowing of the *non-dual*
Self’ and the performance of the *Agnihotra* and other rites, which are
inseparable from the stages of the Householder &c., and which are all
based upon notions of *diversity*

Our answer to this is as follows:—This would be equally applicable to
Renunciation also, which also consists of restraints and observances,
which presuppose diversity.

It might be argued that—“For the man who has renounced all activity and
entered the path of Inaction, there are no scriptural injunctions at
all”.

Such certainly is not the meaning of the scriptures. Renunciation is
going to be described as ‘the surrendering of the notions of *I* and
*mine*’, and not the abandoning of all that is enjoined by the
scriptures. Further, in connection with the Renunciate also, when he is
hungry and goes about begging food, the notion of action and agent is
always present. Under the circumstances, what reasonable man could
assert that—“in the case of the Renunciate there is no incompatibility
between his engaging in the said acts pertaining to the ordinary worldly
life and his realising of the non-dual Brahman,—while there is a clear
incompatibility between this latter and the performance of the
*Agnihotra* and other acts prescribed by the scriptures”?

The following argument may here be put forward “When the Renunciate is
hungry and engages himself in eating, there is certainly incompatibility
between this act and his knowledge of Self; but this incompatibility or
incongruity lasts during that time only; just when a man walks in the
dark he may put hist foot upon thorny places; but when the sun rises and
he obtains sufficient light, he places his foot only upon the right
path, which is free from thorns; in the same manner, during the time
that the man is suffering from hunger, he loses sight of his knowledge
of Self; but as soon as the cessation of hunger comes about, like light
in the other case, his firm conviction regarding the Self reasserts
itself and the man regains his knowledge”.

The same may be said regarding the Hermit also.

For the Householder also, there would be nothing incongruous in his
attending to his wife and children and also meditating upon Brahman.

“But how can the man of manifold activities, who has become identified
with *diversity*, ever obtain conviction regarding *Non-duality*”?

In connection with the duties of the Householder also it has been laid
down that—‘he shall meditate in solitude’ (4.248), and ‘having made over
eveything to his son &c.’ (4.247)

“It has been declared in the *Śruti* that ‘the man desiring heaven
should not die before the span of his lift; has run out how then can
there beany ‘giving up of the body’ for the Hermit? It is not possible
for the present text to restrict this *Śruti-* text to cases *other than
that of the Hermit*. Because the *Śruti* is more authoritative, and as
such, could not be restricted in its scope by the *Smṛti*.”

There would be no going against the said *Śruti* if the man were to seek
death when his body is torn up by old age and by sorrows and he knows
that death is near at hand. What the

*Śruti* says is ‘before the span of his life has run out’; where as if
dying were not considered right under nay and every circumstances, then
it would have simply said ‘one desirous of heaven should not die.’
Further, the Upaniṣads speak of several signs of approaching death; and
these also have their use in connection with the *Śruti* in question;
the sense being that ‘unless a man knows of impending death by means of
such signs he shall not seek to die.”—(32)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Āsām anyatamayā*’—‘The aforesaid austerities as also the *Great
Journey*’ (Medhātithi); so also ‘others.’ There is no difference of
opinion among the commentators, as Buhler makes out,

Hopkins is wrong in translating ‘*bhṛguprapāta*’ as ‘drowning;’—Buhler
has understood it rightly to mean ‘precipitating himself from a mount.’

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.55), winch adds the following
notes:—The ‘*brahmoloka*’ here meant is not ‘the eternal Brahman’, but a
particular *region*; otherwise there would be no sense in the adding of
the term ‘*loka*’; also because Liberation (which would be the ‘reaching
of the eternal Brahman’) is not held to be attained without the fourth
Life-stage of Renunciation; as is clear from the *Śruti* text
(Chāndogya) which speaks of the first three life-stages as
‘*puṇyalokāḥ*’, ‘leading to sacred regions’, and of the
‘*Brahmasaṃstha*’ (Renunciate) alone as attaining immortality.’

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 5.31);—in
*Aparārka* (p. 945), which adds that the ‘methods’ referred to are those
described under verse 23 *et. seq*. it adds that all that has been
prescribed under the ‘duties of the Religious Student’ has to be
followed by the Householder, the Hermit and the Renunciate also, in so
far as it does not militate against anything that has been prescribed
specifically for any of these.

It is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 398).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6.31-32)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
6.31].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

032	A Brahmana, having got rid of his body by one of those modes practised by the great sages, is exalted in the world of Brahman, free from sorrow and fear.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

032	A Brahmana, having got rid of his body by one of those modes practised by the great sages, is exalted in the world of Brahman, free from sorrow and fear.
</details>
