+++
title = "033 वनेषु च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having thus passed the third part of his life in the forest, the man shall, during the fourth part, renounce all attachments and go forth (a wandering mendicant).—(33)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इतःप्रभृति चतुर्थाश्रममतिः । **तृतीयं भागम्** इति । कंचित् कालं स्थित्वेत्य् अर्थः । यावता कालेन तपः सुतप्तं भवति विषयाभिलाषश् च सर्वो निवृत्तः । न हि मुख्यतृतीय आयुषो भाग एवानेन शक्यो ज्ञातुम् । न हि वर्षशतापेक्षाश्रमाणाम्, यतो वलीपलितापत्योत्पत्ती[^१०] तृतीयाश्रमप्रतिपत्तौ काल उक्तः । न च सर्वस्य पञ्चाशद् वर्षदेशीयस्य तद् उत्पद्यते । उक्तं चान्यत्र "तपसि ऋद्धे परिव्र्जेत्" इति ।


[^१०]:
     M G: -otpattīs

- <u>ननु</u> च यथान्येषाम् आश्रमाणां कालो विवृतो ग्रहणान्तं ब्रह्म्चर्यम्, वलीपलिताद्यवधि गार्हस्थ्यम्, नैवम् इह कश्चित् परिच्छेदहेतुर् अस्ति । यदि यथाश्रुतं तृतीयो भागः समाश्रियेत, यच् च "तपसि ऋद्धे" इति, तत्रापि कालापेक्षा युक्तैव । न ज्ञायते कियता तपसा ऋद्धिर् भवति । अतः कालपरिच्छेदो न वचनार्हः । 

- <u>उक्तम् अत्र</u> न शतवर्षापेक्षया तृतीयायुर् भागनिश्चयः संभवति । उक्तश् च कालः- कायपाके प्रव्रज्या प्रतिपत्तव्या । यावता तपसा यावति च वयसि पुनर् मदवृद्धिर् नाशङ्क्यते तदा परिव्रजेत् । 

- **विहृत्या**सित्वा यथोक्तं विधिम् अनुष्ठायेति यावत् । सङ्गत्यागश् च ममतापरिग्रहः एकारामता ॥ ६.३३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Henceforward we have the description of the fourth life-stage.

‘*Third part*.’—*i.e*, having remained, in the forest *for some time*;
for such time as would suffice for the due performance of austerities
and the proper allayment of longing for objects of enjoyment. The phrase
cannot be taken as standing precisely for the exact ‘third part’ of the
man’s life; because the period of the life-stage is not determined
precisely with reference to one hundred years (the alleged span of man’s
life); because the time for entering on the third life-stage has been
indicated as that marked by the appearance of ‘wrinkles and grey hair’;
and in every man these do not always appear at the completion of fifty
years. Then again, elsewhere it has been declared that ‘one should go
forth on the completion of his austerities’.

“In the case of the other life-stages the time has been precisely
indicated—*e.g*. (*a*) Studentship shall continue till the Veda has been
got up, (*b*) the life of the Householder shall continue till the
appearance of wrinkles and grey hairs; in the present instance however
no such time is indicated; whether we take it to be the ‘third part’ as
asserted in the present text, or ‘on the completion of
austerities,’—even so we stand in need of information regarding the
exact time meant; for there is no knowing by what time one’s austerities
might be completed. For these reasons it is necessary that the time
should be indicated by the words of the text”

It has already been explained that the ‘third part of life’ cannot be
determined with reference to ‘a hundred years’; and as regards the exact
time, it has been clearly indicated by such words as—‘one should take to
the life of the Wandering Mendicant after the body has fully ripened’;
which means that ‘one should go forth after he has performed enough
austerities, and till sufficiently advanced age, to be convinced that
there is no more chance of any recrudescence of the passions.’

‘*Having passed*’— having lived through; *i.e*. having carried on the
duties as detailed above.

‘Renouncing of attachment’ consists in not harbouring notions of *I* and
*mine*, in *resting within one’s self*.—(33).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Saṅga*’—‘Attachment to sense-objects’ (Kullūka);—‘possessions’
(Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 532);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 562);—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 64),
which says that the division is to be made on the basis of the life-span
of one hundred years.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6.33-34)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.1-6).—‘Now we shall explain the rule for entering the
order of Renunciates. Some say that he who has finished his studentship
may become a renunciate immediately after that. But according to others
renunciation is fit only for such *Śālīnas* and *Yāyāvaras* as are
childless, or widowers. In general, they prescribe renunciation after
the completion of the seventieth year and after the children have been
firmly settled in their sacred duties. Or a Hermit may become a
Renunciate on the completion of the special rites prescribed for him.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.15-17).—‘It is declared in the Veda that “entering
stage after stage man becomes one with Brahman.” They quote also the
following verse—“Ho who has passed from stage to stage, has offered
burnt oblations and kept his organs under subjection, becomes
afterwards, tired with giving alms and making offerings, a Renunciate.
Such a Renunciate becomes one with the Infinite.’

*Viṣṇu* (96.1).—‘After having passed through the first three stages, and
having annihilated passion, he should offer an oblation to Prajāpati in
which he gives away all his belongings as the sacrificial fee, and enter
the stage of the Renunciate.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.55-56).—‘Passing on from the stage of the Householder
or from that of the Hermit, he shall perform the sacrifice to Prajāpati,
at which he gives away all his belongings as the sacrificial fee, and on
its completion, withdrawing the fires within himself, he shall turn his
mind towards Liberation, after having studied the Veda, performed
*Japa*, begotten sons, made gifts of food, maintained the fires, and
performed sacrifices to the best of his capacity.’

*Jābāla-smṛti* (Aparārka, p. 946).—‘Having completed Studentship, he
shall become a Householder; after having been a Householder, he shall
become a Hermit; after having been a Hermit he shall go forth as a
Renunciate; or he may go forth directly after Studentship or
Householdership or Hermitship.’

*Jābāla* (Parāśaramādhava, p, 535).—‘One should go forth the very day on
which he becomes freed from all attachments.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 947).—‘After he has lived in the forest
as a Hermit, the man, calm and advanced in age, should make up his mind
to go forth as a Renunciate. Having withdrawn the fires within himself,
free from all such feelings as fear, avarice, delusion, anger, sorrow,
envy, pride and jealousy, he should not wait for any time; as men’s
determinations are evanescent; hence he shall not wait for *to-morrow*,
*to-morrow*; that very day he shall renounce all activities and go forth
as a Renunciate.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Do., p. 949).—‘Leading the life of the Hermit, having his
sins burnt by austerities, the twice-born man shall take to renunciation
and enter the fourth stage. ì laving made offerings to Brāhmaṇas, gods
and his own Pitṛs and men, and having performed the *Vaiśvānarī* or the
*Prājāpatya* sacrifice, he shall deposit the fires within himself and
shall go forth, uttering the proper *mantras*: thenceforward he shall
renounce all affection and longing for sons and others.’

*Nṛsiṃhapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 951).—‘The Brāhmaṇa, whose gestatory,
generative and digestive organs and the head are well-controlled, may go
forth as a Renunciate, even without having married, and live on alms.
Renunciation consists in the giving up of the affections, attachment to
objects of sense, son, wife, good and evil, as also the anxiety for
worldly affairs.’

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 533).—‘If any one reverses the order of the
stages, he is the most sinful among men. If one having been a
Householder, becomes a Religious Student, he is neither a Renunciate nor
a Hermit; he is beyond the pale of all the stages.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do., p. 534).—‘Having found the world to be devoid of
essence, and longing for the essential substance, the man, being free
from all attachment, goes forth, without marrying. One may go forth
either directly after Studentship or after having led the life of the
Householder, or after having lived as a Hermit in the forest.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 536).—‘On the death of his wife, if he does not take to
another wife, he should go forth as a Renunciate; or this highest path
may be taken up by one who, having lived as a Hermit, has shaken off all
his sins.’

*Nārada* (Do, p. 537).—‘Even from the very first stage, if the Brāhmaṇa
becomes freed from all attachment for this ocean of worldliness, and
desires liberation, he should renounce relationships and go forth as a
Renunciate.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 537).—‘There are four stages
prescribed by the Veda for the Brāhmaṇa, three for the Kṣatriya, two for
the Vaiśya and one for the Śūdra.’

*Vāmanapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Pour stages have been spoken of for the Brāhmaṇa;
three only, *i.e*., those of the Householder, the Student, the Hermit,
for the Kṣatriva; only two—Householdership and Hermitship—for the
Vaiśya; only one, that of Householdership, is proper for the Śūdra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.60).—‘Controlling his senses, renouncing all love and
hatred and fear of things, the *twice-born* man becomes immortal.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 966; Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Having paid
off the three debts, being freed from all notions of *I* and *mine*, the
Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, may go forth from the house.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Having deposited the fires
within himself, the *twice-born* man should become a Renunciate.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

033	But having thus passed the third part of (a man's natural term of) life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth part of his existence, after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

033	But having thus passed the third part of (a man's natural term of) life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth part of his existence, after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects.
</details>
