+++
title = "036 अधीत्य विधिवद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

After having studied the Vedas according to rule, having begotten sons in the rightful manner, and having offered sacrifices to the rest of his ability,—he shall turn his mind towards Liberation.—(36).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"त्रिभिर् ऋणैर् ऋणवा जायते यज्ञेन देवेभ्यः प्रजया पितृभ्यः स्वाध्यायेनर्षिभ्यः" (त्स् ६.३.१०.५) इति श्रुत्यनुवादिनी स्मृतिर् इयम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "गृही भूत्वा प्रव्रजेत् । अथ वेतरथा ब्रह्मचर्याद् एव प्रव्रजेत्" (जाबु ४) इति जाबालश्रुतिः ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । उत्पत्तिमात्रम् आश्रित्योक्तम् उदाहरति । तत्रेदं विरुध्यते "अनुत्पाद्य तथा प्रजाम्" (म्ध् ६.३७) इति । 

- <u>यद्य्</u> एषा श्रुतिर् अस्ति किं तर्हि ।

- <u>इदम् उच्यते</u> । "प्रत्यक्षविधानाद् गार्हस्थ्यस्य" (ग्ध् ३.३६) इति । "प्रव्रजेत्" इति- तेन[^११] तु प्रव्रजितेनेमानि कर्माणि कर्तव्यान्य् अनया वेतिकर्तव्यतयेत्य् एतन् नास्ति । गृहस्थस्य त्व् अग्निहोत्रादीनि साङ्गकलपान्य् आम्नातानीत्य् एतदभिप्रायम् एतत् । ये त्व् एतां श्रुतिम् अदृष्ट्वा स्मार्ता एव नैष्ठिकादयस् ते च गृहस्थाश्रमेण प्रत्यक्षश्रुतिविधानेन बाध्यन्ते । 


[^११]:
     M G 1st ed.: na

- <u>ये च</u> क्लीबाद्यनधिकृतविषयतया स्मृतिवाक्यानाम् अर्थवत्तां वर्णयन्ति, <u>तेषाम्</u> अभिप्रायं न विद्मः । यदि तावद् आज्यावेक्षणविष्णुक्रमाद्यङ्गाशक्तौ श्रौतेषु नाधिक्रियते, यतस् तथाविधाङ्गयुक्तं कर्म यः[^१२] संपादयितुं समर्थस् तं प्रत्य् अधिकारश्रुतीनां अर्थवत्त्वे जाते न तद् असमर्थम् अपि कुर्वीतेति । यद्य् एवं स्मार्थेष्व् अपि नैष्ठिकस्य गुर्वर्थम् उदकुम्भाद्याहरणं भैक्षपरिचरणम्, पारिव्राज्ये ऽपि "न द्वितीयाम् अपि रात्रिं ग्रामे वसेत्" (ग्ध् ३.२१) इति, कुतः पङ्ग्वधयोः स्मार्तकर्मक्रमाधिकारः । उपनयनं चैषाम् अस्ति लिङ्गम् । तत एषां विवाहार्थनं "यद्य् अर्थिता तु दारैः" (म्ध् ९.२०३) इति । यद्य् अप्य् उपनयनम् आदित्यदर्शनम् अग्निप्रदक्षिणं परीत्येति च विहितम्, यतो नानुपनीतस्य विवाहसंभवो व्रात्यत्वात्, अतो यावच् छक्यं गुरुशुश्रूषणं विगुणम् अपि ब्रह्मचर्यम् एवम् अस्ति । क्लीबस्य तु प्रकृतेर् अनुपनेयतैव । स च पिततश् च न क्वचिद् अधिकृतः । 


[^१२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: yaḥ

- तस्माद् अनधिकृतविषयं पारिव्राज्यं नैष्ठिकता चेति न मनः परितोषम् आदधाति । सत्यम् उदितहोमनिन्दावद् भविष्यति । समुच्चयपक्षम् आश्रित्य "अनपाकृत्य" (म्ध् ६.३५) इति निन्दावचनम्, न पुनः प्रतिषेध एव । अथ वा यदाकृतदारपरिग्रहस्य प्रव्रज्यायाम् अधिकार इत्य् एवम् एतन् नेयम् ॥ ६.३६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This *Smṛti-text* reiterates what has been said in the following
*Śruti*—‘Man is born beset with three debts—the debt of sacrifice to the
gods, the debt of offspring to the Pitṛs, and the debt of vedic study to
the sages’ (*Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa*, 1.7.2.1).

“But the Jābāla-śruti has declared that—‘one should go forth as a
mendicant after having been a house-holder, or he may go forth directly
after studentship’."

Our explanation of this is as follows:—What the text just quoted does is
to mention the mere coming into existence of the stage of Renunciation;
and if it were taken in its literal sense it would be contrary to what
is said in the following verse regarding the impropriety of ‘going
forth, without having begotten offspring’.

“Well, when we have the *Śruti* just quoted, what if it be contrary to a
*Smṛti-* text?”

We explain. The necessity of taking to the Householder’s life has been
directly enjoined (with all its details); while all that the text does
in regard to the Renunciate is to enjoin that ‘one shall go forth’; and
nothing is said as to the rites to be performed by the Renunciate, or
the procedure to be adopted in regard to those rites. As regards the
Householder on the other hand, the *Agnihotra* and other rites have been
prescribed along with nil their appurtenant details. This is what we
meant (by urging that the *Śruti* text quoted, if taken in its literal
sense, would be contrary to the *Smṛti-* text). Those persons then who,
not knowing of the *Śruti* text describing the^(‘)three debts’, take
their stand upon *Smṛti* -texts only, and become life-long ‘students’,
find themselves running up against the ‘Householder’s Life’ which has
been directly enjoined.

There are some people who explain the Smṛti-texts relating to the
‘Life-long Student’ as applying to the case of such men as are suffering
from impotence or some such debility, and are, on that account, not
entitled to entering upon the House holder’s Life.

But we do not understand what these people really mean. Their meaning
may be as follows:—Such a person is not entitled to the rites laid down
in the Śruti, on account of their being incapable of properly
accomplishing such acts as *the* *ex* *amining of the clarified butter*
(which cannot be done by the *blind*), or the *walk in Viṣṇu’s steps*
(which cannot be done by the *lame*); and that even so the said
Śruti-texts have their application in the case of such men as are
capable of duly accomplishing the rites with all the said details; so
that there is no need for taking them as forcing the disabled persona
also to perform the acts^(”).

If this is what is meant, then as regards the *Smṛti* -texts also which
speak of the ‘Life-long student’,—such a student also would have to
‘fetch water for the Teacher,’ to beg for food, and so forth; and in
regard to the Renunciate also it has been declared that ‘he shall not
dwell in any one place for a second night’. So that how could the blind
and lame be entitled to these life-stages as prescribed by the *Smṛti*
-texts? In fact the Initiatory Ceremony (*upanayana*) itself is clearly
indicative of all (the four life-stages). Hence the desire of the person
for marriage, which is referred to later on (9.203) in the text—‘if he
has need for a wife etc. &c.’ Though in connection with the Initiatory
Ceremony also, there are several details, such as *looking at the sun,
going round the fire*, and so forth (which cannot be done by the blind
or the lame), yet—in as much as the uninitiated person, by reason of his
having become an outcast, would not be entitled to marry,—it is open to
the man to keep up bis studentship, even though defective, by serving
his Teacher to the best of his ability. As for the impotent man, he is,
by his very nature, unfit for the Initiatory Ceremony; in fact, like the
outcast, he is not entitled to anything at all.

From all this our mind is not satisfied with the view that the life of
the Renunciate (directly after studentship), or that of the Life-long
Student, is meant for disabled people. In fact the two methods may well
be regarded as optional alternatives; as is done in the case of the two
Vedic texts laying down oblations to be offend ‘before sunrise’ and
‘after sunrise’. And it is in accordance. with the alternative view that
nil the four life-stages should be passed through that we have the
passage—‘without paying off his debts &c.’,—which is *deprecatory* and
not *prohibitive* (of Life-long Studentship, or Direct Renunciation).
Or, it may be taken as referring to cases where the married man is going
to take to Renunciation.—(36).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Yatidharmasaṅgraha* (p. 3) along with 35 which
has the following notes:—These two verses mean that a man who has not
already acquired dispassion towards worldly and celestial things should
do all things according to the scriptures and then have recourse to
Renunciation,—‘*vrajatyadhaḥ*’ *i.e*., lingers in the *satya* and other
regions lower than Liberation,—the *Jabāla śruti* justifies Renunciation
also for those who have not passed through all the preceding
life-stages.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6.36-37)  
**

*Bodhāyana* (2.11.34).—‘Those dwell with us who fulfil the following
duties—the study of the Vedas, the studentship, the procreation of
offspring, faith, austerity, sacrificing and giving gifts; he who
praises other duties becomes dust and perishes.’

*Āpastamba* (2.24.8).—(Same as Baudhāyana.)

*Yājñavalkya* (3.57).—‘One shall turn his mind towards liberation only
after having studied the Vedas, performed *japa*, obtained sons, given
away food, maintained the fires and performed sacrifices to the best of
his ability;—never otherwise.’

(For other texts, see under 33-34.)

*Kāmandaka* (2.29-31).—‘The duties of the Renunciate are to renounce all
activity, to live on begging, to dwell under trees, to refuse all gifts,
to avoid injury to living beings, to maintain an attitude of equality
towards all, to be neutral to friends and enemies, to be unmoved by joy
and grief, to be pure in mind and body, to curb speech, observe vows, to
withdraw the senses from their objects, to keep the mind collected, to
be absorbed in meditation and to purify his intentions.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

036	Having studied the Vedas in accordance with the rule, having begat sons according to the sacred law, and having offered sacrifices according to his ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment of) final liberation.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

036	Having studied the Vedas in accordance with the rule, having begat sons according to the sacred law, and having offered sacrifices according to his ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment of) final liberation.
</details>
