+++
title = "038 प्राजापत्यन् निरुप्येष्टिम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having performed the Prājāpatya Sacrifice, wherein all his belongings are given away as the sacrificial fee,—and having reposited the Fires within himself,—the Brāhmaṇa should go forth from his house.—(38).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**प्राजापत्या** अध्वर्युवेदे विहिता । तस्यां च सर्वस्वदानम् विहितम् । तां **कृत्वात्मन्य् अग्नयः समारोप्यन्ते** । समारोपणे ऽपि विधिस् तत एवावगन्तव्यः । **सार्ववेदसं** दक्षिणास्यास्तीत्य् अन्यपदार्थः । **वेदो** धनम्, तत् सर्वं देयम् । इदम् अर्थे विहितः स्वार्थिको व प्रज्ञादेर् आकृतिगणत्वात् । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> पुरुषमेधं प्राजापत्याम् इष्टिम् आहुः । तत्र "ब्रह्मणे ब्राह्मणम् आलभते" इति प्रथमः पशुः, ब्रह्मा च प्रजापतिः, मुख्येन व्यपदेशप्रवृत्तेः प्राजापत्यः पुरुषमेधः । सर्वस्वदानम् अग्निसमारोपणं प्रव्रज्या च तत्रैव् विहिता । एवं हि तत्र श्रुतिः "अथात्मन्य् अग्नीन्त् समारोप्य तत्रारोपणेनादित्योपस्थानाद् अपेक्षमाणैर् अरण्यम् अभिप्रेतात् तदैव देवमनुष्येभ्यः स्थिरो भवति" इति । 

- यत्[^१३] त्व् आत्मन्य् अग्नीन्त् समारोप्य प्रव्रज्यया व्यपदिष्टा, अथाह एत एव आत्मनो यज्ञा, इत्य् अतस् तन्मरणात् तस्यै दत्ता आत्मन्य् एव समारोपिता भवन्ति । अतो भार्यामरणपक्षे प्रव्रज्या, नावश्यं[^१४] "पुनर् दारक्रिया" (म्ध् ५.१६६) इति, तन् न[^१५] । किं तु तस्याः पूर्वमरणे भार्यायै दत्वाग्नीन् अन्त्यकर्मणीति पठितम् इति वक्तव्यम् इति । पौरुषेयो ह्य् अयं ग्रन्थो न वेदः, येनोक्तम् उपालभेमहीति परिहारः स्यात् ॥ ६.३८ ॥


[^१५]:
     M G 1st ed.: tatra


[^१४]:
     M G 1st ed.: nāvaśyā


[^१३]:
     M G: ye
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Prājāpatya Sacrifice*’—as prescribed in the Yajurveda; at this the
giving away of all one’s belongings is enjoined. After this has been
performed, the Fires are reposited by the man within himself; the exact
procedure of this *repositing* also has to be learnt from that same
Veda.

The compound ‘*Sarvavedasadakṣiṇam*’is to be treated as a *Bahuvrīhi*
compound; ‘that at which all one’s belongings are given away as the
sacrificial fee’. ‘*Vedas*’ mean *wealth*; and the whole of this is to
be given away. This is the sense attributed to the ‘an’ affix in the
term ‘*sarvāvedasa*’. Or the ‘*an*’ affix may be taken in the reflexive
sense; the ‘*Prajñādi* group’ (which are laid down as taking the said
affix in this sense) being a purely tentative one.

Others have explained the ‘Prājāpatya sacrifice’ as *human sacrifice*.
At this latter the Brāhmaṇa forms the first animal to be sacrificed in
accordance with the injunction ‘the Brāhmaṇa should be sacrificed to
Brahman’; and ‘Prājāpati’ is only another name f or Brahman; and since a
sacrifice is named after its chief deity, ‘Prājāpatya’ is the name for
the *human* sacrifice. Farther, it is only in connection with this
sacrifice that the scriptures have enjoined the *giving away of all
belongings, the repositing of the Fires within oneself* and *the going
forth as a mendicant*. We have the following *Śruti* -text on this
point:—‘Having reposited the

Fires within himself, and regarding this repositing as a worship
rendered unto Āditya, the man should go forth; then alone does he become
securer than gods and men

Some people have held that the ‘repositing of the Fires within himself’,
which is mentioned in connection with Renunciation, becomes fulfilled if
the Fires are made over to the wife at her death; and hence Renunciation
is to be taken to only in the event of the wife’s death, when a second
wife need not be taken.

But in that case the text bearing on the subject should have been in
some such form as—‘in the event of the wife dying first, the Fires
should be made over to her at her funeral rite’, and since the present
treatise is the work of a human author, and not a Veda, the answer would
not be available that no exception can be taken to its words. (?)—(38).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The second half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.57) to the
effect that the Brāhmaṇa only is entitled to the life of Renunciation.

The verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 538), in the sense
that when going to enter the stage of Renunciation, the man should
perform the Prājāpatya sacrifice in which he should give away all his
belongings as the ‘sacrificial fee’;—and in *Yatidharmasaṅgraha* (p.
13).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bodhāyana* (2.17.21).—‘A Brāhmaṇa who, knowing this, dies after fasting
during the night of Brahman, and depositing within himself the sacred
fires, conquers all guilts, even that of killing a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇu* (96.1, 2).—‘After having passed through the first three stages,
and annihilated passion, he must offer an oblation to Prajāpati, in
which he bestows all his wealth as the sacrificial fee, and enter the
stage of the Renunciate. Having reposited the fires in his own mind, he
must enter the village in order to collect alms.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.56).—‘Either after Studentship, or after Hermitship,
having performed the *Prājāpatya* sacrifice, at which his entire wealth
is given away as the sacrificial fee, and at its completion, repositing
the fires within himself,—(he shall turn his mind towards liberation).’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Repositing the fires within
himself, the twice-born should go forth as a Renunciate, devoted to the
practice of *Yoga*. After having performed the *Prājāpatya* or the
*Āgneyī* sacrifice, and having all his impurities evaporated within
himself, he should have recourse to the stage dedicated to Brahman.’

*Nṛsiṃhapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 539).—‘Leading the life of the
Hermit, having his sins burnt by austerity, the twice-born person
should, in accordance with the law, take to renunciation and enter the
fourth stage. Having made offerings to gods, *Pitṛs*, sages and men, and
also to himself, and having performed the *Prājāpatya* or the
*Vaiśvānarī* sacrifice, he shall reposit the fire within himself and,
reciting mantras, go forth.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 542).—‘Having reposited the fires
within himself, seated in the centre of the altar, and meditating upon
Hari, having obtained the permission of his *guru*, he should pronounce
the *Praiṣamantra*.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

038	Having performed the Ishti, sacred to the Lord of creatures (Pragapati), where (he gives) all his property as the sacrificial fee, having reposited the sacred fires in himself, a Brahmana may depart from his house (as an ascetic).
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

038	Having performed the Ishti, sacred to the Lord of creatures (Pragapati), where (he gives) all his property as the sacrificial fee, having reposited the sacred fires in himself, a Brahmana may depart from his house (as an ascetic).
</details>
