+++
title = "072 प्राणायमैर् दहेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By means of ‘Breath-suspension’ he shall destroy the taints; and by means of ‘Concentration,’ all sin; all attachments by means of ‘Abstraction,’ and by means of ‘Contemplation,’ those attributes that are not independent.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**प्राणायामैर्** इत्य् एतत् पूर्वश्लोकेन दर्शितम् । 

- <u>अपरे</u> त्व् आहुः । **दोषा** रागादयस् तान् **दहेत्** । 

- <u>कथम्</u> प्राणायामैर् दग्धुम् एते शक्यन्ते । युक्तः पापस्य तैर् दाहः । अदृष्टा च तस्योत्पत्तिः शास्त्रलक्षणम्, तथा निवृत्तिर् अपि । रागादयस् तु प्रत्यक्षवेद्याः । तेषां च निवर्त्यनिवर्तकभावः प्रत्यक्षादिवेद्य एव युक्तो भवितुम्, न शास्त्रीयः । यदि शास्त्रम् एवं वदेद् विरमणशीलं निवर्तयेद् इति, किंप्रमाणं भवेत् । तस्माद् रागादिनिमित्तम् अशुभाचरणं दोषशब्देनोच्यते । तस्य कार्यदाहाद् दाहः । स्वरूपतो हि स्वरसत एव कर्मणां क्षणिकत्वान् नाशः । एष एव च दाहः, न त्व् अन्यस्येव भस्मीभावः । एवं च पूर्वश्लोकार्थानुवादः[^२५] ।


[^२५]:
     M G: pūrvaślokārtho 'nuvādaḥ

- **धारणाभिश् च** । 

- <u>ननु</u> च किल्बिषं पापं दोषश् च तद् एव। तत्रैतावद् वक्तव्यं प्राणायामैर् धारणाभिश् च दोषान् दहेत् । किं किल्बिषम् इत्य् अनेन । किल्बिषम् इति वास्तु, किं दोषग्रहणेन । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । दोषग्रहणम् अवश्यं कर्तव्यम्, विशिष्टस्य पापस्य प्राणायामैर् दाहो यथा विज्ञायेत, न सर्वस्येति । दोषशब्देन हि रागादय उच्यन्ते । अतस् तन्निमित्त एव पापे उपचारो यथोक्तः । 

- <u>एवं तर्हि</u> तद् एव क्रियताम्, किं किल्बिषम् इत्य् अनेन । 

- <u>पादपूरणार्थम्</u> इत्य् अदोषः । तत्रोत्पन्नस्य पापस्य प्राणायामा दहना उच्यन्ते । धारणास् तु दोषानुत्पत्तिम् एव कुर्वन्ति । 

- <u>काः</u> पुनर् एता धारणाः । 

- <u>शमयमादिभिर्</u> नियमाद् विषयदर्शनाभिलाषेण प्रकृष्यमाणं मनो धार्यते, तत्रैव स्थाने नियम्यते । ताश् च विषयगतदोषभावना "अस्थिस्थूणाम्" (म्ध् ६.७६) इत्याद्याः । कान्तिलावण्यतारुण्यसंस्थानशौर्यादयः स्त्रीषु दृश्यमाना अभिलाषहेतवः । ते च सविकल्पं प्रत्यक्षग्राह्याः । विकल्पाश् च मनोधाराः । अतो विकल्पान्तरैर् "मूत्रपुरीषपूर्णं नम" इति तस्मिन् विषयगतदोषभावे, "कटककर्पटान्वितं स्त्रीद्रव्यं नाम," "अधिकं प्राणिनो यत् प्रत्नतः परिहर्तव्यम् अभिलषन्ति," "याप्य् एषा सुखलेशभ्रान्तिः सा क्षणभङ्गिनी, तदासेवनेन घोरा दीर्घकालाश् च यमयातनाः" — इत्यादिभिः शक्यन्ते निरोद्धुम् । एतद् एव तत्प्रसंख्यानम् उच्यते । एवं भोजनादिष्व् अपि भावयितव्यम् । "यद् एतच् छर्कराघृतपूरहैयङ्गवीनपायसादि, यच् च भैक्षं कदन्नादिभिः समम् एतच् छरीरधारणतया विशेषाभावात् कस्यचित् प्रकृतेर् जिह्वाग्रे क्षणलवमात्रवर्तमानस्य विशेषो यः सविशेषतया प्रतिभासेत, गन्धर्वनगरप्रख्यो ऽयं क्षणिकावभासः" इति । एवम् अन्यत्रापि स्पर्शदोषो भावयितव्य इत्य् एवम् उपदिशति ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुः । कौष्ठ्यस्य वायोर् मुखनासिकासंचारिणः शरीरैकदेशान्तर्हृदयाकाशाद् अभ्यासवशतो धारणं **धारणा** ।

- <u>ननु</u> च प्राणायामेभ्य एतासां साधारणानां को भेदः । 

- <u>बाहुललाटादाव्</u> अपि यथेच्छं व्याहृत्यादिध्यानरहितं धारणा, प्राणायामा रेचनेनाधिक्रियन्त इति विशेषः ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु "मैत्री मुदिता करुणा उपेक्षा एता धारणा" (च्ड़्। य्सू १.३३) इति मन्यन्ते । 

- मैत्री कृपा मुदोपेक्षा सर्वप्राणिष्व् अवस्थिता ।

- ब्रह्मलोकं नयन्त्य् आशु ध्यातारं धारणास् त्व् इमाः ॥

तत्र मैत्री द्वेषाभावः, न तु सुहृत्स्नेहः, तस्य बन्धात्मकत्वात् । कृपा करुणा चित्तधर्मः, दुःखितजनदर्शनेन "कथम् अयम् अस्माद् दुःखाद् उद्ध्रियेत्"[^२६] इति समुद्धरणकामना । न त्व् अहिंसानुग्रहयोर् अनारम्भ इत्य् उक्तम् । अत एतद् एवम्[^२७] उच्यते, चित्तधर्मो ऽयम् अभ्यसितव्यः । मुदिता शोकव्यावृत्तिर् व्याध्यादिनिमित्ते दुःखे नरकादिभयजे वा, न तु हर्षः, तस्य रागहेतुत्वात् । उपेक्षा विषये, अनुग्राहकेषु उपघाते[^२८] च प्रसिद्धैव । 


[^२८]:
     M G: upaghāte


[^२७]:
     M G: evedam


[^२६]:
     M G 1st ed.: uddhriyeta

- मनसो वान्तर्हृदयाकाशे ब्रह्मचिन्तापरतया निश्चलता धारणा ।

- **प्रत्याहारेण संसर्गम्** । इन्द्रियाणां विषयैः सह संबन्धस् तत्र प्रवृत्तिः संसर्गः, तन् दहेत् प्रत्याहारः । ततो ऽपसरणम् इन्द्रियाणां प्रतिबन्धकरणं वा । आश्चर्यरूपेण न कटकादौ रूपवत्स्त्रीसंदर्शने वा स्थगयितव्ये चक्षुषी, अन्यत्र वा दृष्टिर् उपनेया । एवं सर्वेन्द्रियेषु । एवं च समाधानं योगिनो ऽप्रतिबद्धं भवति ।

- **ध्यानेनानीश्वरान् गुणान्** । गुणान्त् सत्वरजस्तमांसि । ते चानीश्वराः परतन्त्राः चेतनाधीनमूर्तयः । पुरुषस्यानतस्य सुखादिरहितस्य यो ऽभिमानो "अहं सुख्य् अहं दुःखी" इति निर्गुणस्य गुणमन्यताभिमानस्य, गुणपुरुषविवेकध्यानेन दग्धव्यः । "चिद्रूपः पुरुषो निर्गुणो गुणमयी प्रकृतिः" इत्य् एवं गुणपुरुषविवेकः कर्तव्यः ॥ ६.७२ ॥

_स कथं कर्तव्यः । ध्यानेन किं पुनर् ध्येयम्, अत आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is said here regarding Breath-suspension has already been indicated
in the preceding verse.

But some people explain this verse to mean that ‘one shall destroy the
*taints*’—*i*.*e*., *love*, *hatred* &c.

But how can these latter be destroyed by means of Breath-suspension?
What can be destroyed by it is *sin* (not *love* &c.), specially as it
is sin only which has its *origin* as well as *destruction* both
indicated in the scriptures, and hence imperceptible; while Love or
Hatred and the rest are all directly perceptible; so that what destroys
these, and what is destroyed by them, can also be learnt by perception,
and not through the scriptures. If the scripture were to speak of the
destroying of these, its meaning would be that ‘one should destroy these
things, which are by their very nature, destructible’;—and what would be
the authority attached to such a declaration? From all this it is clear
that what is meant by the term ‘taint’ is the *evil deed* that proceeds
from Love and the rest. And this is ‘destroyed’ by the destruction of
its effects; because as for the act itself, it perishes by reason of its
evanescent character. This is what is meant by ‘*dāha*’, ‘being
consumed’, and not being actually *burnt to ashes*.

Thus the present verse is only a reiteration of what has gone before in
the preceding verse.

‘*By means of Concentration*’—

*Objection*—“‘*Kilviṣa* (*Kilbiṣa*)’ is *sin*, so is ‘*doṣa*’ also.
Hence the words of the text should have been ‘by means of
Breath-Suspension and Concentration he shall destroy all *taints*,
*doṣas*’; and there would be no need of mentioning *kilviṣa*, sin,
separately. Or, only ‘*kilviṣa*’, sin,’ need have been mentioned, and
where was the need for mentioning ‘*doṣa*,’ ‘*taint*’, also?”

The explanation is as follows:—It is absolutely necessary to mention the
‘taint’, in order to show that what are destroyed by means of
Breath-suspension are only particular kinds of sin, not all. The term
‘taint’ stands for Love and other like things; and hence the word can be
rightly taken as figuratively indicating such *sinful acts* as are
prompted by Love, Hatred &c., as has been already pointed out.

“If so, then, let the *taint* be mentioned, what is the use of
mentioning the ‘*kilviṣa*,’ sin?”

No objection can be taken to it, as it is mentioned only for the purpose
of filling up the metre. Further (the use of the second term gives the
further meaning that) Breath-suspension is destructive of the sin
accruing from the taints of Love &c., while Concentration stops the sin
from arising at all.

“What is ‘Concentration’?”

By a longing for sensual objects and their enjoyment the mind is
sometimes drawn away from the point where it may have been resting
during the periods of quiescence, self-control and the like; and it is
by means of ‘Concentration’ that it is concentrated, kept fixed on that
same point. As a matter of fact, when one perceives brightness, charm,
youth, shapeliness of the body and so forth in a woman, they give rise
to his longing for her; all these details are apprehended by concrete
perception; and all such perceptions are so many thoughts. Hence they
can be counter-acted by counter-thoughts pertaining to the defects in
the object perceived,—such as ‘her body is filled with urine and
ordure,’ ‘the very object Woman consists of skin and bones;—fie upon the
men that long for such a despicable object;—even the slight pleasure
that she affords is momentary, and ultimately leads to terrible
sufferings at the hands of the Death-god’. This is what is called
‘reflecting over’ the object. This reflection of the defects is what is
spoken of below under verse 76.

The same method of reflection is to be employed regarding food and other
objects of enjoyment. For instance—‘all this—sugar, cakes, fresh butter,
milk-rice and so forth—stands on the same footing as coarse food
obtained in alms; there being no difference in their nutritive power;
the slight difference in their taste that may be felt on the tip of the
tongue, is felt for the infinitesimal part of a second, so that even
this momentary taste is like the imaginary city. Similarly one may
reflect upon the defects in the objects of touch; and so forth. This is
what is taught io the present text (by the term ‘Concentration’).

Others offer the following explanation of the term ‘*dhāraṇā*’ of the
text:—When a man by constant practice succeeds in concentrating his
breath, moving along his mouth and nose, in the cavity of his
heart,—this is what constitutes ‘Concentration’.

“In what way would this differ from Breath-suspension?”

The difference is that we have ‘concentration’ also when the breath is
held up in such places as the arms, the forehead and the like; whereas
in Breath-suspension there is always exhalation at the end.

Others again hold ‘*Dhāraṇā*’ Concentration to consist in the qualities
of ‘Friendliness, Joyfulness, Pathos and Indifference.’ ‘Friendliness,
Kindness, Joyousness and Indifference, towards all living beings, carry
the contemplation to the regions of Brahman; and these constitute
*Dhāraṇā*’. (says an old text.)—Here ‘friendliness’ stands for *absence
of hatred*, and not *friendly affection*; as this latter would be of the
nature of a hindrance;—‘kindness’ is pity, a disposition of the mind; it
consists in the longing to rescue a suffering person from suffering, and
not the actual desisting from injuring, or conferring a benefit upon,
others; it is in view of this that it has been described as a
*disposition of the mind*, which should be practised—‘joyousness’ also
stands for *absence of grief* at suffering caused by disease, or at the
fear of the sufferings of hell, and not for actual *pleasure*, as this
would be conducive to attachment;—‘indifference’ towards objects,
favourable as well as unfavourable, is well known.

Or again, ‘concentration’ may be explained as consisting in fixing the
mind on the inner cavity of the heart, in the process of meditating upon
Brahman.

‘*By Abstraction, all attachment*:—‘attachment’ here stands (or the
connection of the senses with their objects and their being drawn
towards them. This is destroyed by Abstraction; whereupon the senses
become drawn off from the objects, or their attraction is obstructed.
For instance, when one happens to see a bracelet or some such ornament,
or a handsome woman, he shall not fix his eyes upon them, he shall move
his eyes to something else; similarly with all the senses. In this
manner the composure of the Yogin becomes unperturbed.

‘*By means of Contemplation, those attributes that are not
independent*.’ The ‘attributes’ meant here are those of Harmony, Energy
and Inertia; and these are ‘*not independent*,’ being subservient to
something else, in the shape of Consciousness. Though the soul or person
is free from pleasure &c., yet there appears in him the false notion ‘I
am happy—I am unhappy’; though he is free from attributes, he identifies
himself with them;—all this has got to be destroyed by contemplating
upon the distinction between the Soul and the Attributes; that the
distinction between the two has to be drawn in some such form as—‘the
Person, being of the nature of Consciousness is beyond Attributes, and
it is Primordial matter that consists of the Attributes.’—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anīśvarān guṇān*’—‘The three attributes of the Root Evolvent *i.e*.,
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas; these are *anīśvara*, *i.e*., dependent (upon
the Conscious Being) (Medhātithi);—‘qualities of anger, greed etc.,
which are *anīśvara*, *i.e*., do not reside in God’ (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda) qualities opposed to virtue, knowledge, dispassion and
power’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Yatidharmasaṅgraha* (p. 41), which says that
what this verse mentions are
‘*Yama*—*niyama*—*āsana*—*prāṇāyāma*—*pratyāhāra—dhāraṇā* and *dhyāna*’,
all the accessories of Yoga except ‘Samādhi,’ which have been described
in the ordinances as the means of acquiring Right Knowledge.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (96.24).—‘He must constantly be intent upon suppressing his
breath, upon retention of the image formed in his mind and upon
meditation.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**प्राणायामैर् दहेद् दोषान्** रागादीन् सविषयान् तत्कारणं वा ऽकुशलकर्मराशि । तथा च प्राणायामान् शुद्धिहेतून् वक्ष्यति प्रायश्चित्तप्रकरणे । तथा च प्राणायामान् शुद्धिहेतून् वक्ष्यति प्रायश्चित्तप्रकरणे । प्राणायामस्य दोषाणां च विनाश्यविनाशकसंबन्धः । शास्त्रलक्षणत्वाच् छ्रद्दधानीयः, विधिपक्षम् आश्रित्य । यतो नायं प्राणायामस्तुत्यर्थो ऽर्थवादः । स्तुत्यर्थत्वे ऽपि च सति न ह्य् अकस्मात् स्तुतिः प्राणायामानामुपपद्यते इति स्तुत्या विधिर् अनुमातव्यः । **धारणाः** पुनर् अवधारयत्य् आत्मानम् उपसृष्टो यतिर् योगसमाध्यवस्थायां कामक्रोधमोहलोभस्नेहादिभिः प्रवर्त्यमानम् अकुशलेषु, तभिश् च परमार्थदर्शनप्रसंख्यानभावनाख्याभिः कामादिप्रतिपक्षभूताभिर् **धारणाभिः किल्बिषम्** अनुत्पत्त्या **दहेत्** । एवं च प्राणायामैः संचितविरोधः धारणाभिर् स्नागतानुत्पत्तिर् अकुशलस्येत्य् उक्तं भवति । अपरे त्व् आहुर् विशिष्टानि शरीरात्मप्रदेशानि मनसः प्रज्ञाप्रयत्नकृतान्य् आत्मनो यथाबलं **धारणाह्** ।

> <u>अन्ये</u> धारणा मैत्र्याद्याः संचक्षते ।  
> मैत्रीकृपामुदोपेक्षाः सर्वप्राणिष्व् अवस्थिताः ।  
> ब्रह्मलोकं नयन्त्य् आशु ध्यातारं धारणास् त्व् इह ॥

**प्रत्याहारेण** मनस इन्द्रियाणां च **संसर्गान्** विषयसंपर्काख्याञ् छब्दाद्युपलब्धिहेतून् । तेषु ह्य् एवम् उपहेतुषु अन्तःकरणप्रत्याहारेण मनसः समाधानयोगः प्रत्यनीकः । प्रतिलब्धसमाधानस्य प्रतिबन्धकरणत्वाच् छब्दाद्युपलब्धिकण्टकानि ध्यानादीन्य् आहुर् आचार्याः । परमात्मकर्मकेण च प्रणव**ध्यानेनानीश्वरा**न् **गुणान्** योगर्द्धिप्रत्यनीकभूतानैश्वर्यादीन् प्रतिलब्धसमाधानस्य दहमानस्य योगिनः सर्वोपसर्गस्थानम् अतिक्रान्तस्य परमार्थदर्शनप्रसंख्यानभावनाभिर् इति ॥ ६.७२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

072	Let him destroy the taints through suppressions of the breath, (the production of) sin by fixed attention, all sensual attachments by restraining (his senses and organs), and all qualities that are not lordly by meditation.
</details>
