+++
title = "075 अहिंसयेन्द्रियासङ्गैर् वैदिकैश्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By abstention from injuring, by the non-attachment of the senses, by the acts prescribed in the Veda, by the rigorous practising of austerities, they attain the position of That Being.—(75)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इदं तु ज्ञानकर्मणोः समुच्चयान् मोक्ष इति श्लोकद्वयं ज्ञापकम् । पूर्वेण ज्ञानम् उक्तम् । अनेन कर्माण्य् उच्यन्ते । 

- <u>कानि पुनर्</u> **वैदिकानि कर्माणि** येषां फलं **तत् पदं **प्राप्नोतीत्य् उच्यते । यानि तावत् काम्यानि येषां स्वविधिवाक्ये श्रुतम् एव स्वर्गादि फलम् । तद्व्यतिरेकेण फलान्तरकल्पनायाम् अतिप्रसङ्गः । संकीर्णफलताश्रयणं वानर्थकं स्यात् । तावता च वाक्यार्थस्य समाप्तेर् विध्यनपेक्षिततत्पदप्राप्तिलक्षणफलेन कथं संबन्धः । श्रुतेनैवान्वयिना विध्यर्थसंपन्ने ऽन्यत्[^३२] विधिर् नापेक्षते । 


[^३२]:
     M G 1st ed.: vidhyarthasaṃpannena; G 2nd ed: vidhyarthasaṃpatter anyat

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । अस्त्य् एवात्र वाक्यान्तरम् "यज्ञेन तद् आप्नोति" इति रहस्याधिकारे । ततश् च संयोगपृथक्त्वात् फलद्वयं युक्तम् । अतश् च सर्वेषाम् एव काम्यानाम् अविच्छिन्नफलयोगिता परमपदप्राप्त्यर्थता च न विरोत्स्यते । तत्र च यागद्वयेन प्रयोगभेदेन स्वर्गापवर्गौ भवतः । न चात्र यज्ञविशेषः श्रुतो येन नित्यानाम् एतत् फलं स्यान् न काम्यानाम् । 

- <u>अथोच्येत</u> । नित्येष्व् अश्रुतत्वात् फलावच्छेदस्याविरोधात् तद्विषयता युक्ता, न काम्येषु । तावतैव यज्ञेनेत्य् अस्य सर्वविषयत्वलाभाद्[^३३] इति चेत्, 


[^३३]:
     M G: sarvaviṣayatvālābhād

- <u>किम् अत्र</u> फलश्रवणेन । कर्तव्यतानिष्ठानि च वैदिकानि वाक्यानि । सा च कर्तव्यतान्तरेण वैदिकं फलपदं यावज्जीवादिपदैर् अवगमितेति । तत्रापि फलसंबन्धो नापेक्षित एव । कल्प्यमानो ऽधिकत्वान् नैकार्थ्यं यायात् । अतो यज्ञेनेति वाक्यम् अप्रतिष्ठमानं विविक्ते विषये सर्वं यज्ञशब्दवाच्यं नित्यं काम्यं च गोचरयति । 

- न चैतत् फलं काम्यानाम्, अपवर्गकाम इत्य् अश्रुतत्वात् । एतद् अभिप्रायम् एवोक्तम् "कामात्मता न प्रशस्ता" (म्ध् २.२) इति । महाभारते ऽपि "मा कर्मफलहेतुर् भूर् मा ते सङ्गो ऽस्त्व् अकर्मणि" (भ्ग् २.४७) इति । 

- अतश् च भेदग्राहपरिवेष्टितान्तःकरणस्य तृष्णाविद्यावतो ऽनिर्मुक्ताहंकारममकारस्याभिसंहितपरिमितफलप्राप्तिः । इतरस्य त्व् अनभिसंधायफलविशेषचोदितत्वात् कर्तव्यम् इति बुद्ध्या वर्तमानस्यापरिमितनिरतिशयानन्दरूपब्रह्मावाप्तिः ।

- न चैतच् चोदनीयम्- "एकसप्तशतं क्रतवो यावन्तो वा तेषां सर्वेषाम् अनुष्ठानस्याशक्यत्वाद् अनारम्भोपदेशता स्यात्" इति । यतो दर्शनसंपत्त्यैवात्रानुष्ठानसंपत्तिः । अत एवोक्तम् "सम्यग्दर्शनसंपन्नः" (म्ध् ६.७४) इति । सर्वे च क्रतवो दर्शनसंपादनीयाः । तथा चोक्तम् "ज्ञानेनैवापरे विप्रा यजन्ते" (म्ध् ४.२४) इति । 

- <u>अथ वा</u> यांल् लोकान् एतीत्य् अवच्छेदनिर्देशः, स्वर्गकामः पुत्रकाम इति । अतीतानादिभेदग्रहवासितान्तरात्मानो दृष्टफललोभेनासत्येनैव प्रधाने पुरुषार्थे प्रवर्तन्ते । यथा बालः पुष्ट्यर्थे औषधे[^३४] "शिखा ते वर्धिष्यते" इत्य् असत्ययैव शिखावृद्ध्या प्रवर्त्त्यत इति केचित् ।


[^३४]:
     M G: auṣadhena

- <u>अपरं</u> मतम् । नित्यान्य् अत्र कर्माण्य् अभिप्रेतानि । तान्य् अक्रियमाणानि प्रत्यवायहेतुतया प्रतिबन्धकानि । अतस् तैर् अनुष्ठीयमानैर् असति प्रतिबन्धे उक्तं **वैदिकैश् चैव कर्मभिर्** इति । यद्य् अपि तानि न मोक्षार्थतया चोदितानि ।

- **उग्रैर्** अत्यन्तं शरीरतापहेतुभिः । **तस्य** ब्रह्मणः । **पदं** स्थानं ब्रह्मलोकम् । **साधयन्ति** स्वीकुर्वन्ति । 

- <u>अथ वा</u> तदीयपदं यादृशस् तस्याधिकारः, सर्वेश्वरत्वं स्वातन्त्र्यं तद्रूपप्राप्तिर् इति यावत् ॥ ६.७५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

These two verses are indicative of the doctrine that Liberation is
attained by Knowledge and Action combined. The preceding verse spoke of
*Knowledge* and the present one speaks of *Action*.

*Question*:—“What are those acts ‘prescribed in the Veda,’ whose result
is here spoken of as the ‘attaining of the position of That Being’? As
for the voluntary acts, the results of these are already mentioned in
those very texts that enjoin the acts themselves; and if they were to
assume results other than those, there would be carrying the matter to
an absurd length; and it would give rise to the great evil that the
results of the acts would become mixed up and confused. Further, since
the injunctive text would have all its syntactical needs supplied by the
mention of the single result, how could any connection be established
between that text and the additional words that would have to be thrown
in if we were to connect the acts with the further result of ‘attaining
the position of That Being’? As a matter of fact, the needs of the
injunction having been supplied by what is directly mentioned in the
text, it does not stand in need of anything else.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In fact in the Esoteric Section
(of the Veda) we have a distinct text to the effect that ‘one attains
That by means of sacrifice.’ So that by a proper adjustment there would
be both kinds of results accomplished by means of Action; and there
would be nothing incongruous in all the voluntary acts leading to the
more limited results, as also to the attainment of ‘the position of That
Being’; as two distinct sacrifices performed at two different times
would lead to two distinct results The present text moreover has not
specified any particular sacrifice, which could justify the conclusion
that th.e result here spoken proceeds from the *obligatory* acts, and
not from the voluntary ones.

The following argument might be raised against us:—“In as much as no
results have been spoken of in the Vedic texts regarding any results
following from the obligatory acts, it is only right that what is
mentioned in the present text should be connected with those acts, and
not with the voluntary ones; because there would be no difficulty in
connecting it with them; and what the Esoteric text just quoted has
declared regarding ‘*sacrifice*’ leading to That would also be amply
justified by this construction.”

Why should any importance be attached to the mention of results in Vedic
texts? Vedic Texts are purely injunctive in their character; their
function lies in laying down *what should be done*; and that a certain
act *should be done* is made known to us by such terms as ‘as long as
one lives’ and the like, without the help of any words speaking of
results; so that (even when the result is actually mentioned) the word
expressive of the result is not needed at all by the sentence; so that
in cases where it is assumed (and not directly mentioned) it would be
entirely superfluous, and hence could not be construed along with the
injunctive text. Thus then, the conclusion is that the esoteric text
quoted above speaking of ‘sacrifices’ not being capable of being
restricted to any particular kind of sacrifice, must be taken as
including all kinds of sacrifices, obligatory as well as voluntary.

Further, the result spoken of in the present text cannot proceed from
the voluntary acts; as none of then has been enjoined as to be done by
‘one desirous of Liberation’. In fact it was with reference to this that
the text declared (under 2.2) that ‘being given up to desires is not
commendable’; and also in the *Mahābhārata*—‘May thy acts not be done
simply with a view to results. May thou not be addicted to inaction,”
(*Bhagavadgītā* 2.47).

The conclusion thus is that so long as the actor has his mind beset with
notions of diversity, is under the influence of Desire and Ignorance,
and is not free from the notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’,—the results obtained
by him are just the narrow ones that he had bargained for (on the
strength of the Vedic texts); while the other kind of actor, who
undertakes an act without reference to any results, and simply because
it has been enjoined by the Veda and as such *should be done*, attains
*Brahman* Itself, which consists of the highest boundless bliss.

It will not be right to urge against this the following argument:—“There
are one hundred and seventy-one sacrifices; in as much as it would be
impossible for anyone to perform all these, the text would be enjoining
an impossibility (if it meant *all kinds of sacrifices*)”.—Because in
the present context the performance of the acts is meant to be
accomplished by the attainment of *true insight* itself. The meaning is
that all sacrifices are to be accomplished by the said *insight*. This
is what is meant by such texts as—‘Other Brāhmaṇas offer sacrifices by
means of Knowledge itself’.

Or, the particular position or region spoken of in the present text as
attained (by non-injury &c.) may be taken to be just those whose special
character would be determined by the man’s desires—according as he may
be desirous of heaven or sons &c. &c. In fact persons who have their
minds still beset with notions of such diversity as those of ‘past’,
‘present’ and so forth, are prompted by false longings, even when
betaking themselves to acts leading up to the highest ends of man; just
as when a child is tempted to drink a nutritious medicine by the false
hope (set up before it) in the form that by drinking it it would have
long hair.

Another theory on this subject is as follows:—The acts referred to in
the present text are the obligatory ones. It is these whose omission is
sinful, and acts as an obstacle to liberation. And it is the fact of
these being properly performed, the obstacle being thereby removed, that
is spoken of by the expression ‘*by the acts prescribed in the
Veda*’:—even though these have not been enjoined as leading to
liberation.

‘*Rigorous*’—powerfully conducive to the emaciation of the body.

‘*Of that Being*’—of Brahman.

‘*Position*’—place, region.

‘*Attain*’—Acquire.

Or, the ‘*position of that*’ may mean that character of Brahman which
may be in accordance with his desire; *i.e*., being the Lord of all
beings, or self-sufficiency, or the attaining of its very essence, and
so forth.—(75).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vaidikaiḥ karmabhiḥ*’—‘the compulsory acts prescribed in the Veda’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka);—‘the compulsory *and occasional*
acts prescribed in the Veda’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Tat padam*’—‘The region of Brahman’ (Medhātithi);—‘Union with Brahman’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6.74-75)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
6.74].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अहिंसयेति** सामान्यम् अपीदं प्रव्रजितस्य विशेषसाधनम् । तद् धर्मानाम् अपि विशेषाणां निदर्शनार्थम् । एवम् **इन्द्रियसङ्गैः** ब्रह्मचारिणः, **वैदिकैश्** चाग्निहोत्रादिकर्मभिः गृहस्थस्य, **तपसश् चरणैर्** इति तापसस्य । तदैवं सर्वाश्रमेष्व् अयं ज्ञानकर्मसमुच्चयो ब्रह्मत्वप्राप्तिहेतुर् विज्ञेयः, समुच्चयविकल्पपक्षयोर् आश्रमाणाम्, न तु बाधापक्षे । प्रकरणाद् वायं प्रव्रजितस्य विज्ञानकर्मस्मुच्चयः । एवं च सति **वैदिकैश् चैव कर्मभिर्** इत्य् अत्र वेदान्तचोदिता परमात्मोपासना गृह्यते, नाग्निहोत्रादीनि कर्माणि । **तपसश् चरणैर्** इत्य् अत्रापि तद् धर्मा एवानूद्यन्ते । तथा चोपनिषत्स्व् एवाह- "तस्माद् एवंविच् छान्तो दान्त उपरतस् तितिक्षुः समाहितो भूत्वात्मन्य् एवात्मानं पश्यति" इति । न वानप्रस्थधर्माः ॥ ६.७५ ॥

एवं च सत्य् अयम् अनेन सम्यग्विज्ञानसमानभावनाकरमेण प्रसन्नतत्त्वज्ञानो वैराग्यप्रकर्षात् प्रसंख्यायेमं कायम् एव,
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

075	By not injuring any creatures, by detaching the senses (from objects of enjoyment), by the rites prescribed in the Veda, and by rigorously practising austerities, (men) gain that state (even) in this (world).
</details>
