+++
title = "082 ध्यानिकं सर्वम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

All this that has been declared here is appurtenant to Meditation; he who does not realise and cultivate the said mental attitude does not obtain the reward of the acts.—(82)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ध्याने सति भवति **ध्यानिकम्** । ध्याने क्रियमाणे लभ्यते । किं तत् । यद् एतद् अनन्तरम् **अभिशब्दितम्** उक्तम् आभिमुख्येन, न तात्पर्येण प्रतिपादितम् । सुकृतदुष्कृतयोस् तयोः प्रियाप्रियहेतुत्वन्यासः । पुरुषस्य यद् अप्रियकर्तृत्वं तज् ज्वरस्येव पीडाहेतुत्वम् अग्नेर् इव दुरुपसर्पणदग्धृत्वम् । यथा नाग्निदग्धो ऽग्निं द्वेष्टि एवं पुरुषम् अप्य् अप्रियकारिणं मन्येत, न प्रतिषेद्धा स्यात् ।एतच् च ध्याने सति एकाग्रे चित्ते भवति । सर्वकालम् एतद् धृदयेनाभ्यसितव्यम् । यथा सुखदुःखे इमे कर्मणः फलम् । न राजा सुखस्य ग्रामादेर् दता, अपि तु मदीयायासेन प्रथमोपसर्पणलाभः । पूर्वकृतं पुण्यं कर्म दातृ, न राजा । एवं दण्डो नोद्वेजयिता, कर्माणि माम् उद्वेजयन्ति, न राजा, नापि शक्तो ऽन्यः कश्चित् । एतत् सर्वदा ध्यातव्यं चिन्तयितव्यम् । यद् अपि संसारवैराग्यजननायोक्तम् "अस्थिस्थूणम्" (म्ध् ६.७६) इत्यादि तद् अपि नित्यं भावनीयम् ।

- **न ह्य् अनध्यात्मवित्** । 

(१)	<u>अध्यत्मं</u> चित्तम् अत्रोच्यते । **यद् एतद् अभिशब्दितं** न वेत्ति न निश्चिनोति नाभ्यासेन भावयति । स **न क्रियाफलम् उपाश्नुते**[^४५] । परिव्राजकस्य या बैक्षचर्या क्रिया ग्रामैकरात्रवासादिश् च, न तत्फलं मोक्षाख्यं लभते । यावद् अस्थिस्थूणादिभावनया भावेनैव निरभिलाषता सर्वत्र नोत्पन्ना, यावच् च कर्मसु फलन्यासेन रागद्वेषप्रहाणं न कृतम् इत्य् अर्थः । तच् च नित्यं यदा एवं चित्तं पुज्यते तदा भवति, नाकस्माद् इति ।


[^४५]:
     M G 1st ed.: annakriyārthaṃ daleṣu parituṣṭaḥ

(२)	<u>अथ वा</u> "ब्रह्मन्य् एवावतिष्ठते" (म्ध् ६.८१) इति एतस्य **यद् एतद् अभिशब्दितम्** इति परामर्शः । ब्रह्मण्य् अवस्थानं **ध्यानिकम्,** न तु क्रियानुष्ठानमात्रलभ्यम् । किं तद् ध्येयम् इत्य् अत आह- **न ह्य्** **अनध्यात्मविद्** इति । आत्मानम् अधिकृत्य यो ग्रन्थो वेदान्तादिः सो ऽध्यात्मम्, न वेद । अथ वात्मन्य् अधि यो निर्वृत्तस् तद् **अध्यात्मम्,** यथायम् आत्मा देहेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिप्राणादिव्यतिरिक्तः नेषां नाशे नश्यति, कर्ता कर्मणां भोक्ता तत्फलानाम्, भेदग्राहाकृष्टस्य सर्वम् एतद् भवति । यदा त्व् अयम् अपहतपाप्मा न दोषैर् न कार्यैः स्पृश्यते, एकत्वाद् एष एव सर्वम् इदम्, न ततो ऽन्यद् व्यतिरिक्तम् अस्ति । प्रभासमात्रं पृथक्त्वम् । हरिसवर्णसोदकादिका उपनिषदो यो न वेद, ध्यानेनैकाग्रया संततया मत्या न दार्ढ्यम् उत्पादयति, स न यथोक्तं क्रियाफलं लभते । अत आत्मा वेदान्ताभिहितस्वरूपो नित्यम् आहारविहारकालं वर्जयित्वा ध्येय इति श्लोकार्थः ।

(३)	<u>अथ वा</u> यद्य् अपि प्रव्रज्याधिकारस् तथापि गृहस्थस्यापि क्रियाफलग्रहेण निर्देशः, यदि क्रियाप्रधानः । अत एतद् उक्तं भवति । यद्य् अप्य् अग्निहोत्रादीनि कर्माणि कुर्वते गृहस्थाः, रहस्यविद्याविदश् च न भवन्ति, या विद्याः कर्मसूपविष्टा उद्गीथा "अथ वा यावती उद्गीथम् अन्वयन्ते" इत्यादिना तेन निपुणाः कर्मकाण्डज्ञा अपि, न ततः परिपूर्णफलं चिरकालभावि लभन्ते । एषो ऽर्थो वजसनेयके छान्दोग्ये च श्रुतिद्वये निदर्शितः । "यो वा एतद् अक्षरं गार्ग्य् अविदित्वा यजते जुहोति तपस् तप्यते बहून्य् अपि वर्षसहस्रान्य् अन्तवद् एव तद् भवति" (बाउ ३.८.१०) इति, तथा "यद् एव विद्यया करोति श्रद्धया उपनिषदा तद् एव वीर्यवत्तरं भवति" (छु १.१.१०) छन्दोग्योक्तम्[^४६] । यस् तु यथोक्ताम् अध्यात्मोपदिष्टां विद्यां विदित्वा करोति तस्यैव फलातिशयः । उक्तं च "तद् य इत्थं विदुर् य इमे ऽरण्ये श्रद्धा तप इत्य् उपासते" (छु ५.१०.१) इति । यम् "अभिसंभवति" (छु ५.१०.१) इत्यादिविजानतां कर्मकारिणाम् अर्चिरादिमार्गेण ब्रह्मलोकप्राप्तिम् एषां श्रुतिर् आह ॥ ६.८२ ॥


[^४६]:
     Reading chandogyoktam is conjectura; it is omitted by J, and M G read: chandogyokta

_एवम् आत्मज्ञानार्थं ध्येये विहिते वेदजपो न प्राप्तः तत्साधनतयातस् तं विधत्ते ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Appurtenant to Meditation*’,—*i.e*., what comes about only when there
is Meditation; what is attained only when meditation is properly done.

“*All this that has been declared here*’—directly described, not merely
indirectly implied. That is, the cultivating of the feeling that good
and bad deeds are the causes of agreeable and disagreeable
experiences;—when man does something disagreeable, it is always the
outcome of natural fortes of one’s own acts) and stands on the same
footing as when fever causes suffering or fire burns; and just as the
man, who has been burnt by fire, does not hate fire, so also he should
not hate the man that causes him pain; nor shall he forbid him to do it
(just as no one goes to forbid the fire).

All this becomes possible only when there is meditation, when the mind
is duly concentrated. Consequently one should at all times, cultivate
the following thought;—Pleasure and pain are the effect of past Actions;
in reality the King is not the bestower of happiness, of landed property
and other things; in fact it is by my own effort that the first approach
to him was obtained; it is my own past meritorious act that is the real
bestower of the gift, and not the King; similarly the fine imposed
(Penalty inflicted) is not what causes me trouble; it is my own acts
that are troubling me; neither the King nor any one else is able to do
it.’

All this shall always be pondered over, reflected upon; and all that has
been described above as conducive to disgust with the world—thinking of
the body a hut having bones for pillars &c. (76)—this also has to be
always pondered over.

\(A\) ‘*Anadhyātmavit*’;—‘*adhyātma*’ here stands *tor mental
attitude*;—he who does not realise, does not cultivate—the
above-described mental attitude,—‘*does not obtain the reward of the
acts*’; of such acts of the Renunciate, for instance, as *begging alms,
living in the village for a single night* and so forth, he does not
obtain the ‘reward,’ in the shape of *Liberation*. That is to say, the
mere cotemplation (contemplation?) of the body as a hut with bones for
its pillars and so forth does not always bring about freedom from
longing, so long as love and hatred have not been got rid of by the
attributing of all that happens to one’s own acts. When this attitude of
the mind becomes permanently fixed, then alone is the reward obtained,
and not when it comes about only once in a way.

\(B\) \[ *Second explanation of ‘anadhyātmavit*’\]—Or, ‘*what has been
declared*’ may refer to the ‘reposing in Brahman’ (81); and the meaning
thus is that this ‘*reposing in Brahman*’ is ‘*appurtenant to
meditation*,’ and is not attained merely by the performance of acts. And
as regards the question as to what is it that has to be *meditated
upon*, the text adds ‘*nahyanadhyātmavit*’—and the term ‘*adhyātma*’
stands for those treatises on Vedānta that have been composed on the
subject of the Soul;—he who does not know this.—Or ‘*adhyātma*’ may
stand for *that which pertains to the soul*; *i.e*., such ideas as—‘the
Soul is something distinct from the body, the sense-organs, the mind,
the intellect, the life-breath and so forth, and it does not perish when
these perish;—it is neither the doer of acts nor the enjoyer of their
fruits’;—all these notions belong to one who is swayed by the idea of
diversity;—when it has destroyed all evil, it is not affected by the
taints or their effects;—being one, it is all this, there is nothing
apart from it;—diversity is only, apparent. One who does not know all
this as described in the Harisavama, Sadaka and other (?) Upaniṣads, and
does not strengthen these ideas by constant and one-pointed meditation,
does not obtain the said ‘*reward of acts*.’ The sense of the verse in
this case would be that—‘Except at the time that one is either taking
food or engaged in some necessary act, one should always keep meditating
upon the soul as described in the Vedānta and other treatises’.

\(C\) (*Third Explanation*) Or, even though the text occurs in the
section dealing with Renunciation, yet the ‘*reward of acts*’ may be
taken as referring to the Householder also; specially as it is this
latter for whom the performance of acts constitutes the most important
duly. According to this view, the meaning of the verse comes to be
this:—Though Householders may duly perform the *Agnihotra* and other
rites, yet, if they happen to be ignorant of the esoteric
sciences,—those sciences which form the very essence of the rites, in
the shape of the *Udgītha*, which is described as permeating all acts,
and with which all persona learned in rituals ore thoroughly
conversant,—they do not obtain the full reward of those rites, which
appear after a long time. This is what has been described in two *Śruti*
texts of the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka* and the *Chāndogya* Upaniṣads:—(a) ‘O
Gārgi, he who without knowing this syllable, performs sacrifices and
practises austerities even for several thousand years, all this becomes
only perishable; but what is done through full knowledge, with faith and
in full accordance with the esoteric science, becomes extremely
virile’;—that is, excellent results accrue only to him who performs acts
only after having understood the philosophy of the soul. (b) This has
also been declared in the *Chāṇḍoyya—‘Those* who know this and meditate
upon it as frith and austerity etc., etc.,’ (5.10.1). It is with
reference to these persons equipped with full knowledge and performing
the prescribed acts that the *Śruti* has declared that they reach the
region of Brahman by the path of light etc.(82).

The object to be meditated upon, for the sake of obtaining the knowledge
of the Soul, having been thus indicated, it would appear as if the
repeating of Vedic *mantras* were not required at all; hence it is this
that is enjoined by the next verse.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Yadetadabhiśabditam*’—‘What has been described in the immediately
preceding *verses*’ (Medhātithi);—‘what has been described in the
preceding *one verse*’ (Kullūka);—‘what has been described in all the
preceding *chapters*’ (Govindarāja and Nandana);—‘what can be expressed
by words’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Kriyāphalam*’—‘The reward of fulfilling the duties of the Renunciate’
(Medhātithi);—‘reward of the act of meditation’ (Kullūka);—‘reward of
the performance of rites’ (Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

Buhler has misunderstood Kullūka, who does not explain ‘*adhiyajñam*’ as
‘*Brahma-veda*’; he explains it as *yajñam adhikṛtya pravṛttam brahma
vedam*’—where ‘*brahma*’ of the text is explained as ‘*veda*’.
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **ध्यानिकं सर्वम् एवैतद् यद् एतद् अभिशब्दितम् ।**

प्रकरणात् प्रव्रज्याख्यं कर्म सर्वाश्रमकर वा, कार्यसामान्यात् । **द्यान**शब्देन च यावत् किंचिद् अत्र प्रव्रज्याप्रकरणे शास्त्रे वा परमार्थदर्शनम् उक्तं तत् सर्वम् अभिधीयते । तस्मिन् ध्याने परमार्थदर्शने यत् कर्म तद् ध्यानिकम् । एवं च सति परमार्थदर्शनस्तितुर् इयम्, ज्ञानकर्मसमुच्चयस्तुतिर् वा । तथा चोक्तम्- "सम्यग्दर्शनसंपन्नः कर्मभिर् न निबध्यते" (म्ध् ६.७४) इति । अस्य वा हेतुर् अयं विज्ञेयः । कस्मात् पुनर् एतद् एवं भवति, यस्मात्,

> **न ह्य् अनध्यात्मवित् कश्चित् क्रियाफलम् उपाश्नुते  ॥ ६.८२ ॥**

आत्मनि तद् इत्य् अध्यात्मं बुद्ध्यादि तद् वेत्तीत्य् **अध्यात्मविच्** च । पुनर् यथाविषयं व्याकरणीयम् । अस्य निदर्शनार्थम् इदं रहस्यब्राह्मणं भवति "यो वा एतद् अक्षरं गार्ग्य् अविदित्वा ऽस्मिंल् लोके जुहोति यजते तपस् तप्यते बहूनि वर्षसहस्राण्य् अन्तवद् एवास्य तद् भवति" इति श्रुतेः । तथा च समुच्चये प्रशस्यते- "तद् य इत्तम् एतद् विदुर् ये चेमे ऽरण्ये श्रद्धा तप इत्य् उपासते, ते ऽर्चिषम् अभिसंभवन्ति" इत्य् एवमादिः । अधुना षडङ्गवेदाध्ययनोपदेशात् पूर्वत्र ब्रह्मचारिप्रकरणे नियमार्थं प्रव्रजितस्येदम् आरभ्यते, विशेषार्थं वा ॥ ६.८२ ॥

_अध्यात्मनिष्ठत्वोपदेशे वा सति तन्निवृत्त्याशङ्कयानुवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् उच्यते ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

082	All that has been declared (above) depends on meditation; for he who is not proficient in the knowledge of that which refers to the Soul reaps not the full reward of the performance of rites.
</details>
