+++
title = "092 धृतिः क्षमा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(1) Steadiness (2) Forgiveness, (3) Self-control, (4) Abstention from unrighteous appropriation, (5) Purity, (6) Control of the Sense-organs, (7) Discrimination, (8) Knowledge, (9) Truthfulness, and (10) Absence of anger,—these are the ten-fold forms of duty.—(92)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**धृत्या**दय आत्मगुणाः । तत्र **धृतिर्** नाम धनादिसंक्षये सत्वाश्रयः । यदि क्षीणं ततः किं । शक्यम् अर्जयितुम् इति । एवम् इष्टवियोगादौ संसारगतिर् इयम् ईदृशीति प्रचलतश् चित्तस्य यथापूर्वम् अवस्थापनम् । **क्षमा** अपराधमर्षणम् । कस्मिंश्चिद् अपराद्धरि प्रत्युद्वेजनानारम्भः । **दमः** अनौद्धत्यं विद्यामदादित्यागः । **अस्तेयं** प्रसिद्धम् । **शौचम्** आहारादिशुद्धिः । **इन्द्रियसंयम** अप्रतिषिद्धेष्व् विषयेष्व् अप्रसङ्गः । **धीः** सम्यग्ज्ञानं प्रतिपक्षसंशयादिनिराकरणम् । **विद्या**त्मज्ञानम् । कर्माध्यात्मज्ञानभेदेन धीविद्ययोर् भेदः । एतत् पौनरुक्त्यतया[^७४] धीविद्येति पठन्ति । तन् न सम्यक्, भेदस्य दर्शितत्वात् । अन्यत् प्रसिद्धम् । **अक्रोधः** उत्पत्स्यमानस्यानुत्पत्तिः । **क्षमा** कृते ऽप्य् अपकारे ऽपकारानारम्भः ॥ ६.९२ ॥


[^७४]:
     M G 1st ed.: paunaruktatayā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Steadiness and the rest are qualities of the Soul.

\(1\) ‘*Steadiness*’—the feeling of contentment even at the loss of
property and such things; expressed by such feelings as ‘if it has been
lost, what does it matter? It can be acquired again.’ Similarly at
separation from a beloved person, the man regains former equanimity by
thinking that ‘such is the way of the world.’

\(2\) ‘*Forgiveness*’— the excusing of wrongs committed; not seeking to
do injury to a person in return for an injury that might have been done
by him.

\(3\) ‘*Self-control*’—absence of haughtiness, renouncing of pride due
to superior learning &c.

\(4\) ‘*Absention from unrighteous appropriation*’:—this is well known.

\(5\) ‘*Purity*’—cleanliness of food etc.

\(6\) ‘*Control of the Sense-organs*’—not allowing them to be drawn even
towards unforbidden things.

\(7\) ‘*Discrimination*’—true knowledge, following upon the refutation
of all doubtful and contrary views.

\(8\) ‘*Knowledge*’ of the Soul. The difference between ‘discrimination’
and ‘knowledge’ is that the former refers to *Acts*, and the latter to
the *Soul*.

In view of this tautology, some people read ‘*Dhīvidyā*’ (wise
discrimination). But this is not right; specially as we have explained
the difference between the two.

The rest are well known.

‘*Absence of anger*’ is not permitting anger to arise when there is an
occasion for it, and ‘*forgiveness*’ is not doing harm to others even
when they may have done harm to one.—(92).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 6.87-93)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
6.87].

**(verse 6.92)  
**

‘*Dhṛtiḥ*’—‘Fortitude, calmness even on the loss of wealth and such
other calamities’;—‘firmness of purpose in the discharge of duties’
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Damaḥ*’—‘Humility’ (Medhātithi);—‘patience under sufferings’
(Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa);—‘subjugation of the mind’ (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda).

‘*Dhīḥ*’—‘True knowledge, free from doubts and errors (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja);—‘knowledge of the true meaning of the śāstras’ (Kullūka
and Rāghvānanda);—Nārāyaṇa and Nandana, reading ‘*hrīḥ*’, explain it as
‘modesty’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 972), which explains ‘*śaucam*’
as ‘purity of mind and body’,—‘*dhīḥ*’ as ‘discrimination of right and
wrong’,—‘*dhṛtiḥ*’ as ‘keeping the mind from going astray’,—‘*damaḥ*’ as
‘controlling of the mind by means of the *Kṛcchra* and other
austerties’. It adds that this verse enumerates the duties common to all
the four orders;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 16a);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 13), which has the following
notes;—‘*Dhṛti*’, firmness,—‘*kṣamā*’ is nonperturbation of the mind
even when wronged,—‘*dama*’ is control of the ‘mind’,—‘*asteya*’ is
non-appropriation of what is not given,—‘*śauca*’ is cleanliness, both
internal and external,—‘*indriyanigraha*’ is keeping the senses from all
forbidden objects,—‘*hrī*’ (which is its reading for ‘*dhī*’) is
cessation from improper acts,—‘*vidyā*’ is self-knowledge—‘*satya*’ is
saying what is true, which should be *agreeable* also,—‘*akrodha*’ is
freedom from anger.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (10.30).—‘To avoid backbiting, jealousy, pride,
self-consciousness, unbelief, dishonesty, self-praise, blaming others,
deceit, covetousness, delusion, anger, and envy is considered to be the
duty of all orders.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.66).—‘Truthfulness, abstention from unrighteous
appropriation and anger, modesty, purity, discrimination, steadiness,
self-control, control over sense-organs and learning—these have been
declared to be *universal dharma*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 30).—‘To all men—desisting from injuring others,
truthfulness, purity, freedom from jealousy and cruelty and
forgiveness.’

*Kāmandaka* (3.34-36).—‘Not to find no fault with others, to observe his
own duties, to show compassion for the distressed, to address sweet
words to all, to save friends even at the cost of his life, to welcome
enemies coming to the house, to practise charity commensurate with his
resources, to be against sufferings, to conciliate estranged friends, to
treat kindly and obey the wishes of all relations,—these are the
characteristics of the high-minded.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**धृतिर्** नाम यथाशास्त्रम् अवस्थानम् आत्मगुनाद् यतो भवति सा **धृतिः** । **क्षमा** चित्तसंक्षोभहेतुष्व् अप्रतिक्रियापराधमर्षनेन । **दमस्** तु द्वन्द्वाभिमुख्यम्, शास्त्रविहिताभ्यासं **दमं** मन्यन्ते च । परद्रव्येष्व् आत्मसंयमो **ऽस्तेयम्** । आहारादिशुद्धिः **शौचम्** । **इन्द्रियसंयमो** नाम इन्द्रियविषयेष्व् अविरुद्धेष्व् अप्रसङ्गं यथाविषयम् । विज्ञानं शस्त्रात् संशयादिप्रतिपक्षरहितं **धीः** । **विद्या** वेदाभ्यासः । **सत्यम्** प्रसिद्धम् । **अक्रोधः** सत्स्व् अपि संक्षोभहेतुषु चित्तस्याविकारः । पूर्वत्रोत्पन्नस्य क्रोधस्य कार्यानारंभः **क्षमेत्य्** उक्तः, इह त्व् अनुत्पत्तिर् एव क्रोधस्येति विशेषः । सर्वं चैतच् छास्त्रविहितम् अपि सत् सुखावभोधनार्थं पुनः संक्षिप्योक्तम् ॥ ६.९२ ॥

_परिचिन्त्यमानश् च सर्वो ऽयं यमनियमाधीनेति तत्फलविवक्षयेदम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

092	Contentment, forgiveness, self-control, abstention from unrighteously appropriating anything, (obedience to the rules of) purification, coercion of the organs, wisdom, knowledge (of the supreme Soul), truthfulness, and abstention from anger, (form) the tenfold law.
</details>
