+++
title = "097 एष वो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has the fourfold duty of the Brāhmaṇa been expounded to you, which is conducive to imperishable rewards after death. Now listen to the duty of Kings.—(97.)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चतुर्विधो** **धर्मश्** चातुराश्रम्यम् । **ब्राह्मणस्य** सर्वम् एतद् विहितम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "एवं गृहाश्रमे स्थित्वा विधिवत् स्नातको द्विजः" (म्ध् ६.१) इति द्विजग्रहणम् उपक्रमे श्रुतम् । तस्य चानुपजातविरोधित्वात् त्रैवर्णिकार्थिता निश्चिता । अतश् चेदं **ब्राह्मण**ग्रहणं त्रैवर्णिकप्रदर्शनार्थम् एव युक्तम् । यद्य् एकवाक्यतोपक्रमोपसंहार्योर् न स्यात् तदा नैवं स्यात्[^७५] । एकवाक्यत्वे तु बलवद् उपक्रमार्थः शक्यः प्रतिपत्तुम् । 


[^७५]:
     M G omit: tadā naivaṃ syāt

- कृत्स्नवाक्यपर्यालोचनया यो ऽर्थः स निश्चीयते । अतो द्विजग्रहणं ब्राह्मणपरतयोपसंहर्तव्यम् । अस्ति ब्राह्मणस्य द्विजातित्वम्, न तु सर्वेषु द्विजातिषु ब्राह्मण्यम् । अत्रापि द्विजशब्दार्थे संभवति नन्वयिनि लक्षणा न्याय्या । तथा च महाभारते शूद्रस्यापि त्रय आश्रमाः श्रूयन्ते- "शुश्रूषाकृतकृत्यस्य" इति उपक्रम्य "आश्रमा विहिताः सर्वे वर्जयित्वा निरामिषम्" (म्भ् १२.६३.१२–१३) । पारिव्राज्यम् इत्य् आर्थः । नैवं तस्यायम् अर्थः, सर्व आश्रमास् तु न कर्तव्याः । किं तर्हि, शुश्रूषयापत्योत्पादनेन च सर्वाश्रमफलं लभते । द्विजातीन् शुश्रूषमाणो गार्हस्थ्येन सर्वाश्रमफलं लभते, परिव्राजकफलं मोक्षं वर्जयित्वा । 

- अतो ब्राह्मणधर्म एव चातुराश्रम्यम् इति सिद्धम् ॥ ६.९७ ॥

**इति मानवे धर्मशास्त्रे भृगुप्रोक्तायां संहितायां**

**षष्ठो ऽध्यायः ॥**

**इति भट्टवीरस्वामिसूनोर् भट्टमेधातिथिकृतौ**

**मनुभाष्ये षष्ठो ऽध्यायः ॥**
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Fourfold Duty*’—pertaining to the four life-stages; all this has been
expounded for the *Brāhmaṇa*.

“At the outset the text has spoken of the *twice-born person*, in the
opening verse—‘Having thus lived the life of the. Householder, the
accomplished *twice-born person* &c. &c.’, and it has been decided that
the term stands for all the three castes, as there is no sort of
incongruity involved in this. Under the circumstances, the term
‘*brāhmaṇa*’ of the present verse should also be taken as standing for
all the three castes. There would be a justification for denying this
only if the entire Discourse did not form one organic whole, beginning
from the opening verse and ending with the present verse. As a matter of
fact, the opening verse is perfectly amenable to being construed with
this last verse (the whole discourse thus forming one organic whole); so
that it is quite open to us to take this verse as referring to what has
been mentioned in the opening verse.”

As a matter of fact, the sentence is regarded as having that meaning
which is found to be expressed by it, after a thorough consideration of
the sentence as a whole. And in this way, it is distinctly more
reasonable to take the term ‘twice-born person’ (of the opening verse)
us standing for the *Brāhmaṇa* (rather than the other wav). Because
every ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ also is ‘twice-born’, but every ‘twice-born person’
is not a ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’. So that the term ‘twice-born’ being capable of
being directly applied to the *Brāhmaṇa*, it cannot be right to take the
term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ as indirectly indicating the wider circle of
*twice-born* persons.

“But in the *Mahābhārata* we find three life-stages laid down for the
*Śūdra* also;—having started with the words ‘for the *Śūdra* who has
accomplished all his work, there is *attendance*, it goes on to say ‘all
the life-stages have been prescribed for him, except the
*Nirāmiṣa*’—that is Renunciation.”

This is not right. Such is not the meaning of the text quoted; what it
means is as follows—‘the *Śūdra* should not have recourse to the four
stages, he obtains the reward of all the stages by means of *service*
and the *begetting* *of* *children*’;—which means that—‘during
Householdership he obtains, by means of serving the twice-born men, the
rewards of all stages, with the sole exception of Liberation, which is
the reward of Renunciation.’

From this it follows that the Four Life-stages are meant for the
*Brāhmaṇa* only.—(97)



Thus ends the *Bhāṣya* on Discourse VI.

Printed by Rameshwar Pathak at the Tara Printing Works, Benares.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Buhler is not right in asserting that “according to Medhātithi the word
‘*brāhmaṇā*’ is not intended to exclude other Aryans (*dvijas*)”.—He has
evidently been misled by the words in which Medhātithi has set forth an
objection to the text using the word ‘Brāhmaṇa’. See *Translation*.

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.57) in
support of the view that the *Brāhmaṇa alone* is entitled to enter the
fourth stage of the Renunciate;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 564) to
the same effect;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 176),—which says that
‘*brāhmaṇa*’ here stands for all the twice-born persons;—and in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 65) which quotes ‘my grand-father’ to the effect
that ‘*brāhmaṇa*’ stands for all twice-born men,—while it itself favours
the view that it stands for the *Brāhmaṇa only*.
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आगमः सत्य् अपि द्विजातित्वे । तथा च वाजसनेयकं रहस्यब्राह्मणम् इदमर्थं भवति- "ब्राह्मणाः प्रव्रजन्ति" एवमाद्य् उक्तो वर्णाश्रमधर्मः । तद्व्यतिक्रमनिमित्तस् त्व् इदानीं प्रायश्चित्तलक्षणो वक्तव्यो ऽपि स नोच्यते, तत्संरक्षणहेतोः पार्तिवधर्मस्यानभिधानात् । एवं च सति यः श्रद्दधानतया यथाशस्त्रं गुरुम् उपस्थास्यते तस्य व्यतिकर्माभावात् प्रायश्चित्तानधिकार एव, इतरस्य तु राजदण्डभयात् । यः पुनर् अनयोः राजाचार्ययोः शासनातिगो भविष्यति तं प्रत्य् उपदेशः प्रायश्चित्तस्य युज्यते । यतो ऽर्थक्रमाद् एवैतस्मात् प्रायश्चित्तानि प्रोत्सार्य राजधर्मा एव तावच् छिष्यन्त इति ॥ ६.९७ ॥

**ऋजुविमलस्य कृतौ मनुशास्त्रविवरणे षष्ठो ऽध्यायः ।**
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

097	Thus the fourfold holy law of Brahmanas, which after death (yields) imperishable rewards, has been declared to you; now learn the duty of kings.
</details>
