+++
title = "01 ज्यायसी चेत्कर्मणस्ते"

+++
3.1 O Janardana, cet, if it be; te, Your; mata, opinion, intention; that
buddhih, Wisdom; jyayasi, is superior; karmanah, to action-. If the
combination of Wisdom and action be intended (by the Lord), then the
means to Liberation is only one. \[The path combining Wisdom and
action.\] In that case, Arjuna would have done something illogical in
separating Wisdom from action by saying that Wisdom is superior to
action. For, that (Wisdom or action, which is a constituent of the
combination) cannot be greater than that (Combination, even) from the
point of view of the result. \[Since what is intended is a combination,
therefore, the separation of Knowledge from action, from the point of
view of the result, is not justifiable. When Knowledge and action are
considered to form together a single means to Liberation, in that case
each of them cannot be considered separately as producing its own
distinct result. Arjuna's estion can be justified only if this
separation were possible.\] Similarly, what Arjuna said by way of
censuring the Lord, as it were, in, 'It has been stated by the Lord that
Wisdom is superior to action, and He exhorts me saying, "Undertake
action," which is a source of evil! What may be the reason for this;',
and also in, 'Tatkim, why then, O Kesava; niyojayasi, do You urge; mam,
me; to ghore, horrible, cruel; karmani, action; involving injury;'-that
(censure) also does not become reasonable. On the other hand, \[If the
opponent's view be that Knowledge is to be combined with rites and
duties sanctioned by the Vedas and the Smrtis in the case of the
householders only, whereas for others those sanctioned by the Smrtis
alone are to be combined with Knowledge৷৷., then৷৷.\] if it be supposed
that the combination (of Knowledge) with action sanctioned only by the
Smrtis has been enjoined for all by the Lord, and Arjuna also
comprehended (accordingly), then, how can the statement, 'Why then do
you urge me to horrible action', be rational; Besides,
