+++
title = "02 व्यामिश्रेणेव वाक्येन"

+++
3.2 'Though the Lord speaks lucidly, still, to me who am of a dull
understanding, the Lord's utterance appears to be conflicting.'
'Mohayasi, You bewilder; me, any; buddhim, understanding; iva, as it
were; vyamisrena iva, by that seemingly conflicting; vakyena, statement!
You have surely undertaken to dispel the confusion of my understanding;
but why do You bewildered (it); Hence I say, "You bewildered my
understanding, as it were."' However, if You \[In some readings, 'tvam
tu, however, you', is substituted by 'tatra, as to that'.-Tr.\] think
that it is impossible for a single person to pursue both Knowledge and
action, which can be undertaken (only) by different persons then, that
being the case, vada, tell me; niscitya, for certain; tadekam, one of
these, either Knowledge or action: "This indeed is fit for Arjuna,
according to his understanding, strength and situation"; yena, by which,
by one of either Knowledge or action; aham, I; apnuyam, may attain;
sreyah, the highest Good.' Even if Knowledge had been spoken of at all
by the Lord as being subsidiary to steadfastness in action, how then
could there be the desire in Arjuna to know of only one of them, as
expressed in 'Tell me one of these two;' Certainly the Lord did not say,
'I shall speak of only one among Knowledge and action, but surely not of
both', owing to which, Arjuna, considering it impossible for himself to
acire both, should have prayed for one only! The answer was in
accordance witht the estion:
