+++
title = "03 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
3.3 Anagha, O unblemished one, O sinless one; \[This word of address
suggests that Arjuna is alified to receive the Lord's instruction.\]
dvividha, two kinds of ; nistha, steadfastness, persistence in what is
undertaken; asmin loke, in this world, for the people of the three
castes who are alified for following the scriptures; prokta, were spoken
of; maya, by Me, the omniscient God, who had revealed for them the
traditional teachings of the Vedas, which are the means of securing
prosperity and the highest Goal; pura, in the days of yore, in the
beginning the creation, after having brought into being the creatures.
Now then, which is that steadfastness of two kinds; In answer the Lord
says: The steadfastness jnanayogena, through the Yoga of
Knowledge-Knowledge itself being the Yoga \[Here jnana, Knowledge,
refers to the knowledge of the supreme Reality, and Yoga is used in the
derivative sense of 'that (Knowledge) through which one gets united with
Brahman'.\]-; had been stated sankhyanam, for the men of
realization-those possessed of the Knowledge arising from the
discrimination with regard to the Self and the not-Self, those who have
espoused monasticism from the stage of Celibacy; itself, those to whom
the entity presented by the Vedantic knowledge has become fully
ascertained (see Mu. 3.2.6)-,the monks who are known as the
parama-hamsas, those who are established in Brahman alone. And the
steadfastness karma-yogena, through the Yoga of Action-action itself
being the Yoga \[Yoga here means 'that through which one gets united
with, comes to have, prosperity', i.e. such actions as go by the name of
righteousness and are prescribed by the scriptures.\] had been stated
yoginam, for the yogis, the men of action (rites and duties). This is
the idea. Again, had it been intended or stated or if it will be stated
in the Gita by the Lord-and if it has also been so stated in the
Vedas-that Knowledge and action are to be practised in combination by
one and the same person for attaining the same human Goal, why then
should He here tell His dear supplicant Arjuna, that steadfastness in
either Knowledge or action is to be practised only by different persons
who are respectively alified; If, on the other hand, it be supposed that
the Lord's idea is, 'After hearing about both Knowledge and action,
Arjuna will himself practise them (in combination); but, to others, I
shall speak of them as being meant to be pursued by different persons',
then the Lord would be imagined to be unreliable, being possessed of
likes and dislikes! And that is untenable. So, from no point of view
whatsoever can there be a combination of Knowledge and action. And what
has been said by Arjuna regarding superiority of Wisdom over action,
that stands confirmed for not having been refuted; and (it also stands
confirmed) that steadfastness in Knowledge is suitable for being
practised by monks alone. And from the statement that they (Knowledge
and action) are to be followed by different persons, it is understood
that this has the Lord's approval. Noticing that Arjuna had become
dejected under the impression, 'You are urging me to that very action
which is a source of bondage', and was thinking thus, 'I shall not
undertake action', the Lord said, 'Na karmanam anarambhat, not by
abstaining from action,' etc. Or:-When steadfastness in Knowledge and
steadfastness in action become incapable of being pursued simultaneously
by one and the same person owing to mutual contradiction, then, since it
may be concluded that they become the cause of attaining the human Goal
independently of each other, therefore, in order to show-that the
steadfastness in action is a means to the human Goal, not independently,
but by virtue of being instrumental in securing steadfastness in
Knowledge; and that, on the other hand, steadfastness in Knowledge,
having come into being through the means of steadfastness in action,
leads to the human Goal independently without anticipating anything
else-,the Lord said:
