+++
title = "04 न"

+++
3.4 Purusah, a person; na does not; asnute, attain; naiskarmyam, freedom
from action, the state of being free from action, steadfastness in the
Yoga of Knowledge, i.e. the state of abiding in one's own Self which is
free from action; anarambhat, by abstaining; karmanam, from actions-by
the non-performance of actions such as sacrifices etc. which are or were
performed in the present or past lives, which are the causes of the
purification of the mind by way of attenuating the sins incurred, and
which, by being the cause of that (purification), become the source of
steadfastness in Knowledge through the generation of Knowledge, as
stated in the Smrti (text), 'Knowledge arises in a person from the
attenuation of sinful acts' \[the whole verse is: Jnanam utpadyate
pumsamksayatpapasya karmanah; Yathadarsatalaprakhye
pasyatyatmanamatmani. 'Knowledge arises৷৷.acts. One sees the Self in
oneself as does one (see oneself) in a cleaned surface of a
mirror'.-Tr.\] (Mbh. Sa. 204.8). This is the import. From the statement
that one does not attain freedom from action by abstaining from actions,
it may be concluded that one attains freedom from action by following
the opposite course of performing actions. What, again, is the reason
that one does not attain freedom from action by abstaining from actions;
The answer is: Because performing actions is itself a means to freedom
from action. Indeed, there can be no attainment of an end without (its)
means. And Karma-yoga is the means to the Yoga of Knowledge
characterized by freedom from action, because it has been so established
in the Upanisads and here as well. As for the Upanisads, it has been
shown in the texts, 'The Brahmanas seek to know It through the study of
the Vedas, sacrifices, (charity, and austerity consisting in a
dispassionate enjoyment of sense-objects)' (Br. 4.4.22), etc. whch deal
with the means of realizing the goal of Knowledge under discussion, viz
the Realm of the Self, that the Yoga of Karma is a means to the Yoga of
Knowledge . And even here (in the Gita), the Lord will established that,
'But, O mighty-armed one, renunciation is hard to attain without
(Karma-)yoga' (5.6); 'By giving up attachment, the yogis undertake
work৷৷.for the purification of themselves' (5.11); 'Sacrifice, charity
and austerity are verily the purifiers of the wise' (18.5), etc.
Objection: Is it not that in such texts as-'Extending to all creatures
immunity from fear' (Na. Par. 5.43), (one should take recourse to
freedom from action)-, it is shown that attainment of freedom from
action follows even from the renunciation of obligatory duties; And in
the world, too, it is a better known fact that freedom from action
follows abstention from actions. Hence also arises the estion, 'Why
should one who desires freedom from action undertake action;' Reply:
Therefore the Lord said: Na ca, nor; samadhi-gacchati, does he attain;
siddhim, fulfilment steadfastness in the Yoga of Knowledge,
characterized by freedom from action; sannyasanat eva, merely through
renunciation-even from the mere renunciation of actions which is devoid
of Knowledge. What, again, is the reason that by the mere giving up of
actions which is not accompanied with Knowledge, a person does not
attain fulfulment in the form of freedom from actions; To this ery
seeking to know the cause, the Lord says:
