+++
title = "16 एवम् प्रवर्तितम्"

+++
3.16 O Partha, sah, he; jivati, lives; mogham, in vain; yah, who, though
competent for action; na anuvartayati, does not follow; iha, here, in
the world; cakram, the wheel of the world; evam, thus; pravartitam, set
in motion, by God, on the basis of the Vedas and the sacrifices;
aghayuh, whose life (ayuh) is sinful (agham), i.e. whose life is vile;
and indriya-aramah, who indulges in the senses-who has his arama, sport,
enjoyment, with objects, indriyaih, through the senses. Therefore, the
gist of the topic under discussion is that action must be undertaken by
one who is alified (for action) but is unenlightened. In the verses
beginning from, '(A person does not attain freedom from action by
adstaining from action' (4) and ending with, 'You perform the obligatory
duties৷৷.And, through inaction, even the maintenance of your body will
not be possible' (8), it has been proved that before one attains fitness
for steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self, it is the bounden duty
of a person who is alified for action, but is not enlightened, to
undertake Karma-yoga for that purpose. And then, also in the verses
commencing from '(This man becomes bound) by actions other than that
action meant for God' (9) and ending with 'O Partha, he lives in vain,'
many reasons \[Such as, that it pleases God, secures the affection of
the gods, and so on.\] have been incidentally stated as to why a
competent person has to undertake actions; and the evils arising from
their non-performance have also been emphatically declared. Such being
the conclusion, the estion arises whether the wheel thus set in motion
should be followed by all, or only by one who is ignorant of the Self
and has not attained to the steadfastness which is fit to be practised
by the Sankhyas, the knowers of the Self, through the Yoga of Knowledge
only, and which is acired by one ignorant of the Self through the means
of the practice of Karma-yoga mentioned above; Either anticipating
Arjuna's estion to this effect, or in order to make the meaning of the
scripture (Gita) clearly understood, the Lord, revealing out of His own
accord that the following substance of the Upanisads-Becoming freed from
false knowledge by knowing this very Self, the Brahmanas renounce what
is a compulsory duty for those having false knoweldge, viz, desire for
sons, etc., and then lead a mendicant life just for the purpose of
maintaining the body; they have no duty to perform other than
steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self (cf. Br. 3.5.1)-has been
presented here in the Gita, says:
