+++
title = "20 कर्मणैव हि"

+++
3.20 Hi, for; in the olden days, the leaned Ksatriyas, janakadayah,
Janaka and others such as Asvapati; asthitah, strove to attain;
samsiddim, Liberation; karmana eva, through action itself. If it be that
they were possessed of the fullest realization, then the meaning is that
they remained established in Liberation whlile continuing, because of
past momentum, to be associated with action itself-without renouncing
it-with a veiw to preventing mankind from going astray. Again, if (it be
that) Janaka and others had not attained fullest realization, then, they
gradually became established in Liberation through action which is a
means for the purification of the mind. The verse is to be explained
thus. On the other hand, if you think, 'Obligatory duty was performed
even by Janaka and others of olden days who were surely unenlightened.
\[Ajanadbhih: This is also translated as, 'surely because they were
unenlightened'.-Tr.\] There by it does not follow that action has to be
undertaken by somody else who has the fullest enlightenment and has
reached his Goal', nevertheless, tvam, you, who are under the influence
of past actions; arhasi, ought; kartum, to perform (your duties);
sampasyan api, keeping also in view; loka-sangraham, \[V.S.A gives the
meanings of the phrase as 'the welfare of the world', and 'propitiation
of mankind'.-Tr. \] the prevention of mankind from going astray; even
that purpose. By whom, and how, is mankind to be prevented from going
astray; That is being stated: \[In Ast. this introductory sentence is as
follows:loka-samgrahah kimartham kartavyam iti ucyate.-Tr.\]
