+++
title = "34 इन्द्रियस्येन्द्रियस्यार्थे"

+++
3.34 Raga-dvesau, attraction and repulsion, in the following
manner-attraction towards desirable things, and repulsion against
undesirable things; (vyavasthitau, are ordained,) are sure to occur,
arthe, with regard to objects such as sound etc.; indriyasya indriyasya,
of all the organs, with regard to each of the organs. As to that, the
scope of personal effort and scriptural purpose are being stated as
follows: One who is engaged in the subject-matter of the scriptures
should, in the very beginning, not come under the influence of love and
hatred. For, that which is the nature of a person impels him to his
actions, verily under the influence eof love and hatred. And then follow
the rejection of one's own duty and the undertaking of somody else's
duty. On the other hand, when a person controls love and hatred with the
help of their opposites \[Ignorance, the cause of love and hatred, has
discrimination as its opposite.\], then he becomes mindful only of the
scriptural teachings; he ceases to be led by his nature. Therefore, na
agacchet, one should not come; vasam, under the sway; tayoh, of these
two, of love and hatred; hi because; tau, they; are asya, his, this
person's pari-panthinau, adversaries, who, like robbers, put obstacles
on his way to Liberation. This is the meaning. In this world, one
impelled by love and hatred misinterprets even the teaching of the
scriptures, and thinks that somody else's duty, too, has to be
undertaken just because it is a duty! That is wrong:
