+++
title = "36 अथ केन"

+++
Although the root cause of evil was stated in, 'In the case of a
person who dwells on objects' (2.62) and 'because they (attraction
and repulsion) are his adversaries' (34), that was presented desultorily
and vaguely. Wishing to know it briefly and definitely as, 'This is
thus, to be sure', Arjuna, with the idea, 'When this indeed becomes
known, I shall make effort for its eradication', said:


3.36 Atha, now then; varsneya, O scion of the Vrsni dynasty; being
prayuktah, impelled; kena, by what acting as the cause; as a servant is
by a king, does ayam, this; purusah, man; carati, commit; papam, sin, a
sinful act; api, even; anicchan, against his wish, though not himself
willing; niyojitah, being constrained; balat, by force; iva, as it
were-as if by a king, which illustration has already been given; The
Lord (Bhaga-van) said: 'You hear about that enemy, the source of all
evil, of which you ask-.' 'Bhaga is said to consist of all kinds of
majesty, virtue, fame, beauty, detachment as well as Liberation
\[Liberation stands for its cause, Illumination.\], (V.P.6.5.74). That
Vasudeva, in whom reside for ever, unimpeded and in their fullness, the
six alities of majesty etc. and who has the knowledge of such subjects
as creation etc., is called Bhaga-van. 'He is spoken of as Bhaga-van who
is aware of creation and dissolution, gain and loss, \[Gain and loss
stand for future prosperity and adversity.\] ignorance and Illumination
of all beings' (ibid. 78).
