+++
title = "42 इन्द्रियाणि"

+++
3.42 The learned ones ahuh, say; that indriyani, the five \[Five
sense-organs: of vision, hearning, taste, smell and touch; five
motor-organs: hands, feet, speech, and for excretion and
generation-these latter five are also understood in the present
context.\] organs-ear etc., are parani, superior, to the external, gross
and limited body, from the point of view of subtlety, inner position,
pervasiveness, etc. So also, manah, the mind, having the nature of
thinking and doubting; \[Sankalpa: will, volition, intention, thought,
reflection, imangination, etc. vikalpa:doubt, uncertainly, indecision,
suspicion, error, etc.-V.S.A.\] is param, superior; indriyhyah, to the
organs. Similarly, buddhih, the intellect, having the nature of
determination; is para, superior; manasah, to the mind. And yah, the one
who is innermost as compared with all the objects of perception ending
with the intellect, and with regard to which Dweller in the body it has
been said that desire, in association with its 'abodes' counting from
the organs, deludes It by shrouding Knowledge; sah, that one; is tu,
however; paratah, superior; buddheh, to the intellect- He, the supreme
Self, is the witness of the intellect. \[The portion, 'with regard to
which Dweller৷৷.the supreme Self,' is translated from Ast. Which has the
same reading here as the A.A. The G1. Pr. Makes the "abode'' counting
from the organs' an adjective of 'the Dweller in the body', and omits
the portion, 'is tu, however৷৷.buddheh, to the intellect'.-Tr.\]
