+++
title = "001 व्यवहारान् दिदृक्षुस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Desirous of investigating cases, the king shall enter the court, with a dignified demeanour, along with Brāhmaṇas and councillors, versed in counsel.—(1)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रजानां पालनं राज्ञो वृत्तिर् विहिता । सा चात्र ।

- शस्त्रास्त्रभृत्त्वं क्षत्रस्य वणिक्पशुकृषीर् विशः ।

- आजीवनार्थं शूद्रस्य द्विजातीनां निषेवणम् ॥ (म्ध् १०.७९)

- एवं नृपो वर्तमानो लोकानान् आप्नोत्य् अनुत्तमान् ॥ इति ।

तथा धर्मो वर्धते लोके । अन्येषाम् अपि वर्णानां क्षत्रियवृत्त्या जीविनाम् अस्त्य् एव राज्याधिकारः ।

- यः कश्चित् सर्वलोकानाम् पालकश् च नृपः स्मृतः ।

- कर्मनिष्ठा च विहिता लोकसाधारणे हिते ॥

परिपालनं च पीडापहारः । द्वयी च पीडा, दृष्टा अदृष्टा च । तत्र दुर्बलस्य बलीयसा धनहरणादिना बाध्यमाना दृष्टा पीडा । इतरस्य तु विध्यतिक्रमजनितेन प्रत्यवायेनामुत्रिकदुःखोत्पादनम् अदृष्टपीडा । प्रजा हि द्वेषमत्सरादिभिर् इतरेतरम् अयथावद् आचरन्ति, कुपथेन यान्ति, अदृष्टदोषेण बाध्येरन् । अतश् च राज्यनाशः । प्रजैश्वर्यं हि राज्यम् उच्यते । तासु विनश्यन्तीषु कस्य राज्यं स्यात् । व्यवहारादयो ऽतः ।शास्त्रदण्डेन व्यवस्थाप्यमाना न भयात् पृथक् प्रचलन्ति, तथा चोभयथापि रक्षिता भवन्ति । धनदण्डश् च राज्ञः, करशुल्कादि[^१] वा । एतदन्या[^२] धर्मिष्ठजीविका न भवतीति वृत्तिपरिक्षयाद् अपि राज्यावसादः । अतो राज्यस्थित्यर्थं व्यवहारदर्शनं कर्तव्यम् ।


[^२]:
     DK (1: 29) suggests etadanyathā


[^१]:
     DK (1: 29; 4: 1815): karaḥ śuklādi

- तद् इदानीम् उच्यते । **व्यवहारश्** चात्र वादिप्रतिवादिनोर् इतरेतराशनोद्धाराय[^३] वृत्तिर् उच्यते । अथ वा ऋणादानादयः पदार्था एव विप्रतिपत्तिविषयाः सन्तो विचारगोचरसमर्थतया कर्तव्या इति । **दिदृक्षुर्** इत्य् उक्त्वा "पश्येत् कर्याणि" (म्ध् ८.२) इति सामानाधिकरण्यम् । पुनश् च प्रत्यवमर्शः "तेषाम् अद्यम् ऋणादानम्" (म्ध् ८.४) इति । तान् पदार्थान् विचारयेद् इति संबन्धः । वक्ष्यमाणाधिकृतपुरुषाधिष्ठितः प्रदेशः **सभा** । **प्रवेशस्** तदभ्यन्तरभावः । किम् एक एव प्रविशेत् । नेत्य्[^४] आह **ब्राह्मणैः सहेति** । अथ **मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति कस्य विशेषणम् । न तावन् मन्त्रिणः, मन्त्रित्वाद् एव सिद्धेः । न हि मन्त्रम् अजानानो मन्त्रीति शक्यते वक्तुम् । नापि ब्राह्मणानाम्, व्यवहारदर्शने ऽधिकृतानां तत्परिज्ञानम् अदृष्टाय[^५] स्यात् । 


[^५]:
     M G J: adṛṣṭaṃ na; I follow DK (1: 29).


[^४]:
     M G J: praviśec cety; I follow DK (1: 29; 4: 1815).


[^३]:
     M G J: -āśanodhārāya; I follow DK (1: 29); DK (4: 1815) suggests: -āśayoddhārāya

- अत्रोच्यते । ब्राह्मणविशेषणम् एवैतत् । ते ह्य् अमन्त्रज्ञा[^६] भूत्वा निरपेक्षम् अवधारयन्तः स्युः । अन्यथा राज्ञो ऽनर्थम् आवहेयुः । तथा हि महामत्याश्रितः कश्चिज् जनपदेन व्यवहरन् सहसा जितो यदि न दण्ड्यते धनं वावष्टभ्य न दाप्यते, तदा समत्वेन व्यवहारदर्शनं न कृतं स्यात्, पक्षपातम् अशक्तिं वास्य जनपदा मन्येरन् । अथ दण्ड्यते, महामात्यक्षोभाद् अपि प्रकृतिविकृतं स्यात् । मन्त्रज्ञास् तु सन्तः संशयितारो यदि निर्णेतव्यस्य केनचिद् अपदेशेन प्रसङ्गरोधं कृत्वा रहसि राजानं परिबोधयन्ति "अनयोर् विवादिनोर् अयं जीयते ऽयं जयतीति, व्यवहारस् त्व् अस्माभिर् न तदानीम् एव निर्णीत इति स्वामी प्रमाणम्" । तत्र राजैवं विदित्वा महामात्यम् आदेशयति "त्वदीयो मनुष्यो जीयते, मम हनिर् मा भूद् इति संप्रति निर्णयो ऽवधीरितः । त्वम् एव तथा कुरु यथैष मनुष्यः संधीयते, बाधास्य व्यपनीयते" । ते मन्त्रिणो वादेयवाक्या मनुष्याणां सर्वेषाम् अनर्थ्यां च प्रवृत्तिं प्रतिबध्नन्ति ।


[^६]:
     DK (1: 29; 4: 1815) suggests: hi mantrajñā

<u>अन्ये</u> तु काकाक्षिवद् उभयविशेषणम् अर्थबेदेन **मन्त्रज्ञ**पदं मन्यन्ते । यदा मन्त्रिणो विशेष्यन्ते तत्तद्धातुतत्परिज्ञानं[^७] मन्त्रज्ञानम् । ब्राह्मणपक्षे तु कार्यार्थसमभावश् च । मन्त्रिब्राह्मणानां न प्रवेशमात्रम् एव, किं तर्हि निर्णयं "पश्येत्" (म्ध् ८.२) इत्य् उत्तरत्रवाक्याद्[^८] यथायोग्यम्,[^९] इतरथा अदृष्टाय प्रवेशः स्यात् । अतो नैकाकी निर्णयं कुर्यात्, किं तर्हि तैः सह निरूप्येति ।  
**विनीतः** वाक्पाणिपादचापलरहितः । वेपतो ह्य् अनर्थः स्यात् । **पार्थिव**ग्रहणान् न क्षत्रियस्यैवायम् उपदेशः, किं तर्ह्य् अन्यस्यापि पृथिव्याम् अधिपतेर् देशेश्वरस्य, न ह्य् अन्यथा[^१०] राज्यम् अविचलितं भवतीति ॥ ८.१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been laid down that the protection of the people is a duty of the
king; and this duty has been described in the following text: (*a*) ‘As
a means of livelihood, to carry arms and weapons for the Kṣatriya, and
to trade, to rear cattle and agriculture for the Vaiśya, and the serving
of the twice-born for the Śūdra’—(10.79). The king who acts up to this
attains unexcelled regions; and in this manner virtue prospers among the
people.

Other castes also, who may be living the life of the Eṣattriya, are
entitled to kingship:—‘Whoever happens to be the protector of the people
is regarded as the *king*, Lord-Protector; and their duty has been
ordained to consist in the good of the common people.’ By ‘protection’
here is meant the *removal of troubles*.

Troubles are of two kinds —*seen* and *unseen*. It is a case of ‘seen
trouble’ when the weaker man is oppressed by the stronger, who takes
away by force his belongings; and it is a case of ‘unseen trouble’ when
the latter person suffers pain in the other world, through the sin
accruing to him on account of his having transgressed the law (by taking
what did not belong to himself). People very often act towards pne
another in hatred, jealousy and so forth, and hence going by the wrong
path, they become subject to ‘unseen’ evils; and thence follows the
disruption of the kingdom; since it is only the *prosperity of the
people* that is called ‘kingdom’; so that when the people are in
trouble, where would the ‘kingdom’ lie?

It is for this reason that when cases are investigated and decided in
strict accordance with the ordinances of scriptures, people, through
fear, do not deviate from the right path; and hence they become
protected against both kinds of trouble. Then again, in as much as for
the king there is no other lawful moans of livelihood except the fines
imposed upon criminals, and the taxes and duties, any obstacles in the
proper administration and collection of those leads the kingdom into
trouble.

From all this it follows that for the sake of preserving the kingdom,
the investigation of cases is necessary, and it is this that is now
described.

The term ‘*vyavahāra*,’ ‘case,’ is the name given to that action of the
plaintiff and the defendant which they have recourse to for the purpose
of reclaiming their rights. Or, it may stand for the non-payment of
debts and such other matters themselves, which often become the subjects
of dispute and as such fit for investigation, which thus becomes the
duty of the king.

The term ‘*desirous of investigating*’ is to be construed with ‘shall
investigate the suits’ (of the next verse) and the said ‘points of
dispute’ are referred to in detail again (in verse 4)—‘Of these, the
first is non-payment of debts, etc.’; the construction being that ‘he
shall investigate all these matters.’

The ‘court’ is that place which is presided over by the officer going to
be described below;—‘*entering*’ means *going into* the place.

The question arising as to whether or not the king shall enter the
Court, alone, unattended, the text adds—‘*along with Brāhmaṇas*.’

*Question*.—“What does the adjective ‘*versed in counsel*’ qualify? It
cannot qualify the ‘*councillors*’; as the said qualification is implied
by the very name ‘councillor,’ for one who does not know the art of
counselling can never be called a ‘councillor.’ Nor can it qualify the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; because since they are entrusted with the work of
investigating cases, the knowledge of *counsel* (if prescribed) could be
prescribed only for some transcendental purpose.”

To the above we offer the following reply: The qualification is of the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; if they were ignorant of counsel, they would arrive at
random and wrong conclusions, and thereby bring trouble to the King, for
instance, if a certain ordinary person were to file a suit against some
one connected with the Chief Minister,—and the latter happens to lose
the case,—then, if he were not fined, or if he were not forced to pay up
the fine, the administration of justice would not be impartial; and the
people would come to the conclusion that the King is cither partial or
too weak-minded;—on the other hand, if the man were fined, this would
displease the Chief Minister, and that also would lead to trouble among
the people. In such cases, if the investigating officers happen to be
‘versed in counsel,’ then, whenever they are in any such suspense, they
postpone the proceedings of the case, under some pretext, and advise the
King in private, to the following effect—‘You please do something
yourself, whereby the man may be made to compromise between these two
parties,—this party loses and that party wins the case,—but the case has
not been disposed of by us; the decision now rests with your Majesty.’
Thereupon, the King, having come to know the facts of the case, orders
the Chief Minister to the following effect—‘Your man is going to lose
his case,—but for the present the decision has been postponed, in order
that your prestige may not suffer; it is for you to do something whereby
the other party may be appeased and his grievance removed.’ Upon this
the Minister, whose advice is accepted by all men, takes steps to stop
the evil propensities of all men.

Others hold that, just as the single eye of the crow operates in both
sockets, so the epithet ‘*versed in counsel*’ is applicable to both,
‘*Brāhmaṇas*’ and ‘*councillors*,’ but in different senses: when
qualifying the ‘*councillors*,’ being ‘versed in counsel’ connotes *the
knowledge of the details of the cases*; and when qualifying the
‘*Brāhmaṇas*,’ it connotes *impartiality*.

The Brāhmaṇas and the Councillors are not to *enter* only; but they are
to help, in the best manner they can, in the ‘investigating of suits’
(spoken of below). If this were not meant, then their ‘entering’ could
only be intended to serve some transcendental purpose. Thus the sense is
that the King shall not decide cases by himself alone, but in
consultation with the councillors and Brāhmaṇas.

‘*With a dignified demeanour*’;—*i.e*., free from fickleness of speech,
hand and feet. If he were fickle, there would be trouble.

The use of the term ‘*pārthiva*,’ ‘*king*,’ implies that the teaching
here addressed is meant not only for one who is *Kṣatriya* by caste, but
for others also, who may happen to be owners of land and a kingdom.
Because unless he dues what is here laid down his sovereignty does not
become duly established.—(1)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 600), which explains
‘*mantrajñaḥ*’ as ‘*arthaśāstrajñaḥ*’, ‘learned in the Science of
Polity’, and deduces the sense that the person who tries cases should
act up to the principles of the Science of Polity, in so far as they are
not incompatible with the Dharmaśāstra, the Ethical Science.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 18), to the effect that
having entered the court, the king shall carry on the work, in
association with learned men and with councillors;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha*
(page 2) in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 1b):—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(3a), which has. the following notes—‘*Vyavahārān*’, points of dispute
between the plaintiff and the defendant,—‘*didṛkṣuḥ*’, with a view to
determine,—‘*pṛthivīpatiḥ*,’ includes *non-Kṣatriyas*
also,—‘*mantrajñaiḥ*’, persons conversant with the method of doing
business in due accordance with the exigencies of time and place,—this
qualifies ‘*brāhmaṇaiḥ*’, ignorant Brāhmaṇas being prone to give hasty
advice and thereby create trouble,—‘*mantribhiḥ*’ stands for experienced
councillors;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 4a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.1-2)  
**

*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The king or the judge ora Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall examine the witnesses.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the king or the minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.72).—‘Let the king try causes himself, accompanied by
well-instructed Brāhmaṇas.’

Do. (71.60).—‘Near the Fire, Deities and Brāhmaṇas, he shall raise the
right arm.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.359).—‘Every day, he shall look into cases himself,
surrounded by members of the Assembly.’

Do. (2.1).—‘The king shall try causes, accompanied by learned Brāhmaṇas,
in strict accordance with legal scriptures,—being free from anger and
avarice.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 596).—‘The king, assisted by the minister, free
from all love and hatred, shall carefully look into the causes of
contending parties.’

*Nārada* (Do. p. 599).—‘The king composedly looking into cases himself
obtains bright fame here and reaches the regions of Indra.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.7, 9-13).—‘*Vyavahāra* i s that which, by
discriminating the good from the evil, ministers to the virtues of both
the people and the king, and furthers their interests. The king should
attentively look after law-suits, freeing himself from anger and greed,
according to the dictates of the legal scriptures,—in the company of the
Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the Priest. He should never singly
try cases of two parties, or hear their statement. Neither the wise king
nor the Councillors are to hold a trial in secret.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.85).—‘The King should enter the court modestly,
together with the Brāhmaṇas and the Ministers versed in
state-craft,—with the object of investigating cases.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘The King shall be accompanied by
those permanent members who are experienced, having hereditary
connections, the best of the twice-born, expert in the sacred law and in
the science of polity.’

*Kātyāyaṇa* (Parāśaramādhava--Vyavahāra, p. 17).—‘That place is called
*Dharmādhikaraṇa*, Court, where the truth regarding suits is
investigated in pursuance of the legal scriptures.—The king shall enter
the court after having finished all his daily duties, and after having
duly honoured, with flowers and ornaments, his preceptor, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and Priests.’

Do. (Vīramitrodaya-Vyavahāra, p. 14).—‘If the King looks into lawsuits,
with the assistance of the Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the
Priest, he attains heaven.’

Do. (Vyavahāratattva, p. 2).—‘Accompanied by the Judge, the Minister,
the Brāhmaṇa and Priest, the King himself shall determine their victory
or defeat.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.4-5).—‘The king, his chosen representative Judge, other
Judges, the Law, the Accountant and the Scribe, Gold, Fire, Water, and
the Bailiff are the ten components of the Court; in which the King
examines causes with due attention.’

Do. (1.20 *et. seq*.).—‘Let the King try causes, attended by these
Judges, after having entered the Court, in a sitting or standing
posture. Having risen early in the morning and performed ablutions
according to rule, and having honoured the elders, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and domestic priests.’

Do. (27.25).—‘Let the King every day examine in common with learned
Brāhmaṇas, the suits preferred by litigants, as also those instituted by
the King himself.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मात्स्यम्यायनिवृत्त्या लोकस्थित्यर्थम् अयं व्यवहारान् द्रष्टुम् अन्वेषणशीलः **ब्राह्मणैः सह पार्थिवः** यान् उपरिष्टाद् वक्ष्यति "यस्मिन् देशे निषीदन्ति विप्रा वेदविदस् त्रयः" इति तैः सह । यतस् तेषाम् इदं विशेषणं क्रियते **मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति । एवं च यदि वेदविदो ऽपि सन्तो **मन्त्रज्ञा** न भवन्त्य् अधिकलक्षणप्राप्त्यर्थम् इदं तद्विशेषणम् । लोकव्यवहारज्ञा **मन्त्रज्ञाः** । **मन्त्रिभिश् चैव मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति समानं पूर्वविशेषणम् । इयांस् तु विशेषः- मन्त्रिणो राजतन्त्रव्यवहारज्ञा नियोगत इष्यन्ते, इतरत्र तु न प्रतिषेधः । अतस् तान् अप्य् एवं विशिनष्टि । **विनीतः प्रविशेत् सभाम्** । **विनीतो** ऽनुद्धतवेषालङ्कारः । **सभां** वक्ष्यमाणाम् "ब्रह्मणस् तां सभां विदुर्" इति । सत्य् अपि च ब्राह्मणस्य धर्मोपदेष्टृत्वे गुरुत्वे च व्यवहारदर्शने ब्राह्मणो न प्रधानीक्रियते । असमर्थो ह्य् असाव् अल्पपरिग्रहत्वाद् अकार्यकारिणो वशीकर्तुम् । क्षत्रियस्य तु करशुल्कप्रीतिभोगदण्डपरिक्रयेण प्रजापालनोपदेशात् परिग्रहमहत्त्वं वृत्तिमतो ऽर्थगृहीतम्, यतः प्रजासंरक्षणार्थम् अकार्यकारिणां निग्रहे तस्य सामर्थम् अस्ति । एवं च सति व्यवहारदर्शने क्षत्रियः प्राधान्येनोपदिश्यते । अथ वादृष्टप्रयोजन एव क्षत्रियस्य व्यवहारदर्शनोपदेशः । व्यवहरणं व्यवहारः । इहैको ऽपि स्वार्थ[संबन्धितया] व्यवहर्तीतरो ऽप्य् अन्यथेत्य् एवं विविधं नानावहरणम्, विरुद्धं वेतरेतरहरणं व्यवहारः ॥ ८.१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	A king, desirous of investigating law cases, must enter his court of justice, preserving a dignified demeanour, together with Brahmanas and with experienced councillors.
</details>
