+++
title = "007 स्त्री-पुन्धर्मो विभागश्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Of these the first is (1) Non-payment of Debt; (then) (2) Deposits, (3) Selling without ownership, (4) Joint concerns, (5) Non-delivery of what has been given away,—[4]—(6) Non-payment of wages, (7) Breach of Contract, (8) Recision of Sale and Purchase, (9) Dispute between the Owner and the Keeper,—[5]—(10) Disputes regarding Boundaries, (11) and (12) Assault, physical and verbal, (13) Theft, (14) Violence, (15) Adultery,—[6]—(16) Duties of man and wife, (17) Partition, and (18) Gambling and Betting;—these are the eighteen topics that form the basis of law-suits.—(4-7)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.4-7)  
**

‘Non-payment of debt’ is regarded as ‘*first*,’ foremost, only by reason
of the order in which the several heads are found mentioned in the
law-books. Or ‘*first*’ may mean ‘the most important,’—its ‘importance’
lying in the fact that it affects even those who live in the forests.

Connected with the ‘non-payment of debt’ is also the subject of the
‘non-granting of the acquittance-receipt’; when, for instance, the
debtor says to the creditor ‘I have repaid your debt, now let me have
the acquittance receipt.’ This ‘nongranting of the acquittance-receipt’
is not the same as the ‘non-payment of debt’; but though not directly
denoted by that term, it is implied by it.

What are included under the head of ‘non-payment of debt’ are thus
enumerated (by *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘What debt is payable and what
non-payable,—when, how and to what extent?—as also the methods of
delivery and receipt.’

Now ‘payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, that, contracted by
his father, and by one whose property he inherits.

‘Non-payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, if (along with the
interest) it exceeds the double of the principal, or that contracted by
his father in gambling, etc.,’ as declared in the text—‘That contracted
by the son, or husband or father, etc.’ (Says *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘A woman
may not pay the debt contracted by her husband, or by her son, unless
she has promised to pay it, or if the debt he one contracted by her
jointly with her husband.’ Though all this is included under ‘payable
debt,’ yet when it happens to be such as is contracted in gambling,
etc., then by itself, irrespective of all other peculiar circumstances,
it becomes ‘non-payable’; but all this ‘payability’ or ‘non-payability’
is in relation to the person called upon to pay; and bonce the names
‘payable’ and ‘non-payable’ may he taken as similar to the expression
‘*gobalībarda*’ (*i.e*., generally speaking, by itself, the debt is
*payable*, but under special circumstances, pertaining to the person and
the relationship to the original debtor, etc., it becomes
*non-payable*).

‘*To what extent*’ (in Nārada’s text) means—‘up to the limit of the
double of the principal’; the distinction here also being as before. If
we read ‘*yatra*’ (in Nārada’s text), this term would refer to the
*place* and *time* of payment; the idea being that the debt shall he
repaid *where* it was taken; but if the creditor so wish it, it may he
paid at another place also. The *time* of payment also should as nearly
as possible be the same. As regards time, it has been said that there is
no desire to repay debts during the Autumn, the most suitable time being
either the Summer, when the harvest has been gathered in, or whenever an
income is expected.

‘*How*’ (in Nārada’s text);—*i.e*., so far as possible, the entire debt
shall be paid; if this be not possible, then by instalments, till the
whole is cleared off; and lastly, in the event of the debtor being
entirely reduced to penury, he shall clear off the debt by service, as
declared in verso 177 below.

‘*The methods of delivery and receipt*,’—*i.e*., the signature of
witnesses, the execution of deeds and so forth.

‘*Assaults, physical and verbal*’ (*verse 6*);—the compound
‘*daṇḍavācike*’ is formed in accordance with Pāṇini 5.4.106, the final
‘*ṭhan*’ affix being added according to 5.2.115.

‘*Duties of man and wife*’ (*verse* 7);—the compound ‘*strīpumān*’ is to
be expounded as ‘*striyā sahitaḥ pumān*,’—the compound belonging to the
same class as the compound ‘*śākapārthivaḥ*.’ If it were formed as
‘*stṛī ca pumaṃśca*,’ the resultant compound would be
‘*strīpuṃsadharmaḥ*’ (according to Pāṇini 5.4.77).—(4-7)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verse 8.4)**

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā (on* 2. 5);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, p. 3 b);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 1) which explains
‘*anapākarma*’ *as* ‘*non-delivery*’;—in *Aparārka* (p. 596);—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3 b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 89b).

**(verse 8.5)**

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p, 596);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 1), which explains ‘*anuśayaḥ*’ as
‘*paścāttāpaḥ*’, ‘revoking—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1.)—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 896).

**(verse 8.6)**

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p, 596);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p.
1);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 89b).

**(verse 8.7)**

‘*Vyavahārasthitau*’—‘Giving rise to law-suits’ (Govindarāja);—‘in
deciding law-suits’ (Nārāyaṇa),

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p.
1), which explains ‘*dyūta*’ as ‘gambling with inanimate objects’ and
‘*samāhvayaḥ*’ as ‘gambling with animals,’ and notes that though theft,
adultery, defamation and assault are all only forms of ‘crime’
(‘*Sāhasa*’) yet they have been mentioned separately, also, on the
analogy of such expressions as ‘*Gobalīvarda* .’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 596), which explains ‘*padāni*’ as
‘*sthāna*’, ‘*viṣāya*’, ‘subjects;’—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛṣiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtya* *kalpataru*’ (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 89b.)

On verses 1-7 *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 4a) has the following
notes:—‘*Vyavahārān*,’ business described above,—‘*pārthivaḥ*,’ the
anointed Kṣatriya;—the term ‘*nṛpaḥ*’ implies that what is here enjoined
applies also to those who, though not themselves kings, are appointed by
the king to work for him;—‘seated or standing’ may be options to be
determined by the king’s capacity, or by the respectability or otherwise
of the parties appearing before him the raising of the right arm is for
calling the attention of suitors; the dress etc. are to be humble, so
that the parties may not be confounded by his gorgeous
attire;—‘*pratyaham*’ shows that cases should be tried every day ;—‘
*deśadṛṣṭa*’ are those customs and arguments that may have local
application, such as the customs regarding the betrothal of girls
(described above) among ‘northerners.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.4-8)  
**

*Nārada* (1.16 *et. seq*.).—‘Recovery of Debt, Deposits, Partnership,
Resumption of Gift, Breach of Contract of Service;—Non-payment of wages,
Sales effected by a person other than the rightful owner, Non-delivery
of sold chattel, Recission of Purchase, Transgression of a Compact,
Boundary-disputes, Mutual Duties of Husband and Wife, Law of
Inheritances, Heinous offences, Abuse, Assault, Games, and
Miscellaneous;—these are the eighteen topics of legal procedure.’

*Bṛhaspati* (2.5 *et. seq*.).—‘Law-suits are of two kinds, according as
they originate in demands regarding wealth or ininjuries. Law-suits
regarding wealth are divided into fourteen kinds; and those regarding
injuries into four kinds. (1) Lending money on interest, (2) Deposits
(and Treasure Trove), (3) Invalid gifts, (4) Concerns of Partnership,
(5) Nonpayment of wages, (6) Disobedience, (7) Disputes concerning Land,
(8) Sale without ownership, (9) Revocation of sale and purchase, (10)
Breach of agreements, (11) Law between wife and husband, (12) Theft,
(13) Inheritance and (14) Gambling.—These are the fourteen titles
regarding wealth.—(l) and (2) Two kinds of Insults, (3) Violence and (4)
Criminal connexion with the wife of another man,—these are the four
titles originating in injury.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विवादास्पदनिर्देशो ऽत्र चतुर्भिः श्लोकैः । **आद्यं** मुख्यम् । ऋणव्यवहारो ह्य् एष वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृशति, अतो ऽस्य मुख्यतोच्यते ॥ ८.४–७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	(16) Duties of man and wife, (17) partition (of inheritance), (18) gambling and betting; these are in this world the eighteen topics which give rise to lawsuits.
</details>
