+++
title = "009 यदा स्वयम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When he himself may not carry on the investigation of suits, he shall appoint a learned Brāhmaṇa to do the work of investigation.—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

- अष्टादशपदाभिज्ञं प्राड्विवाकेति संज्ञितम् ।

- आन्वीक्षिक्यां च कुशलं श्रुतिस्मृतिपरायणम् ॥ 

कुतश्चिद् अतिपातिकार्यान्तरव्यासङ्गाद् अपाटवाद् वा यदि स्वयं न पश्येत् तदा विद्वान् ब्राह्मणो नियोज्यः । विद्वत्ता च या व्यवहारविषया सा तदधिकारत एवार्थगृहीता । न हि यो यन् न जानाति स तत्राधिकारम् अर्हति । धर्मशास्त्रपरिज्ञानं तु रागद्वेषदोषेण विपरीतार्थावधारणनिवृत्त्यर्थम् उपयुज्यते । धर्मज्ञस् तु सतोर् अपि रागद्वेषयोः शास्त्रभयेन न[^८८] विपर्येत्य् इत्य् उपयोगवद् धर्मशास्त्रपरिज्ञानम् । व्यवहारदर्शनं तु तदर्थगृहीतम् । येन विना न शक्यते व्यवहारनिर्णयः कर्तुम्, तद्विज्ञानं तदधिकाराक्षिप्तम् । यत् तु ज्ञात्वान्यथा क्रियते तन्निवृत्तिर् उपदेशान्तरविषया । वक्ष्यति चैवमर्थं यत्नान्तरम् अपि- "वेदविदस् त्रयः राज्ञश् च प्रकृतो विद्वान्" (म्ध् ८.११) इति । शास्त्रान्तरपरिज्ञानं तु व्यवहारे ऽधिक्रियमाणस्यादृष्टाय स्यात् । "नियोज्यो विद्वान् स्यात्" इति पठितव्यम् । **नियुञ्ज्याद्** इति, नियुञ्जीत "स्वराद्यन्तोपसृष्टात्" (पत् इ- २९०, ओन् पाण् १.३.६४) इति हि कातीया आत्मनेपदं स्मरन्ति ॥ ८.९ ॥


[^८८]:
     M G omit: na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa who is thus appointed should be ‘conversant with the
eighteen points, well versed in the Science of Reasoning, fully learned
in the Veda and the Smṛtis,—being called the Investigating Judge.’

If, either on account of being absorbed in some other more important
business, or on account of his inherent incapacity, the king does not
investigate the suits personally, then he should appoint a ‘*learned*’
*Brāhmaṇa*. The ‘learning’ here meant is that pertaining to legal
proceedings, and the man’s appointment itself is indicative of his
possession of that learning; because no man deserves to be appointed to
do a work which he does not know. A knowledge of the Science of Morality
also comes useful, for the purpose of precluding the possibility of
wrong decisions being taken under the influence of love or hate. If the
man is conversant with Morality, even though love or hate may be present
in his mind, yet, through fear of the said Science of Morality, he does
not allow himself to be misled_(;) and it is thus that a knowledge of
the Science of Morality comes in useful. As for the knowledge of legal
procedure, its presence is already implied; when the man is appointed to
do the work of deciding legal cases, it follows that he is possessed of
that knowledge without which such cases cannot he decided. The
injunction regarding the impropriety of the man knowingly perverting his
judgment is contained in other texts; and with a view to avoiding this
our author is going later on to lay down other Measures: *e.g*., ‘Three
persons learned in the Veda, and the learned man appointed by the king,
etc.’ (*verse* 11). As for the knowledge of Sciences other than these,
if it were made a necessary qualification for the man appointed to
investigate legal cases,—such knowledge could only be regarded as meant
for some unseen transcendental purpose.

‘*Niyojyo vidvān syāt*’ would be the right reading (in place of *tadā
niyuñjyād vidvāṃsam*’); because ‘*niyuñjyāt*’ is grammatically wrong,
the right form being ‘*niyuñjīta*’; as Kātyāyana’s Vārtika on Pāṇini
1.3.66 ordains the *Ātmanepada* ending for the root ‘*Yuj*’ preceded by
prepositions ending in a vowel.—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 21), which adds
that the Brāhmaṇa so appointed is called the ‘*Prāḍvivāka*,’ ‘judge,’
who is to try the suits exactly in the same manner as has been laid down
for the king; It adds a text from Nārada explaining the name
‘*Prāḍvivāka*—‘The *Prāḍvivāka* is so called because *he puts questions*
(prāṭ) upon the subject-matter of the suit and *investigates* *it*
(Vivāka).—It is quoted also in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 36);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (8a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 10b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The King or the Judge or a Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall try the suit.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the King or his minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.73).—‘Or let him entrust a Brāhmaṇa with the judicial
business.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.3).—‘The Brāhmaṇa knowing the entire Dharma shall be
appointed by the King to try law-suits, if, under pressure of business,
he is unable to look into them himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.24).—‘Let the King, or a member of the twice-born caste
officiating as Chief Judge, try causes acting on principles of equity,
and abiding by the opinion of the judges and the doctrine of the sacred
law.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.23-34).—‘Where the King cannot personally attend to the
administration of justice, he should appoint a Brāhmaṇa who is versed in
the Vedas, self-controlled, highborn, impartial, unagitated and calm,
who fears the next life, is religious-minded, active and devoid of
anger. If the Brāhmaṇa is not learned enough, the King should appoint a
Kṣatriya, or a Vaiśya who is versed in the sacred law; but he should
never appoint the Śūdra, The king should always appoint men of the caste
to which he himself belongs; as most members of the royal caste are
likely to be well-qualified.’

*Nārada* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘He is called the Chief
Judge who,—fully acquainted with the eighteen titles of law and with the
eight thousand subdivisions thereof, skilled in Logic and other
sciences, and thoroughly versed in revealed and traditional
lore,—investigates the law relative to the case in hand by *putting
questions* and *passing decisions* according to what was heard or
understood by him.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘When no Brāhmaṇa is
available, the King shall appoint a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya versed in legal
lore; but he shall avoid the Śūdra.’

*Prajāpati* (Smṛticandrikā).—‘The anointed King or the learned Brāhmaṇa,
seated on the seat of judgment, shall investigate the suits quietly.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यदा कुतश्चिन् निमित्तान्तरतः स्वयं नृपतिः कार्यं न पश्येत्, तदा नियुञ्ज्याद् **ब्राह्मणं कार्यदर्शने**, नान्यवर्णं धर्मज्ञं व्यवहारज्ञम् अपि सन्तम्, ब्राह्मणम् अपि च विद्वांसं ब्राह्मणज्ञेयेष्व् एव शास्त्रेषु । तद्वर्तिधर्मानतिलङ्घनार्थोच्यते- व्यवहारदर्शनार्था तु विद्वत्तार्थगृहीतत्वाद् अशासनीया (?) ॥ ८.९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

009	But if the king does not personally investigate the suits, then let him appoint a learned Brahmana to try them.
</details>
