+++
title = "013 सभां वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should either not enter the Court at all, or he should speak out what is equitable; one who either spe aks nothing, or speaks falsely, becomes tainted with sin.—(13)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अनेनार्थेन द्वयं विप्रतिषिध्यते । प्रतिपन्नाधिकारेण मिथ्यादर्शनं न कर्तव्यम् अन्येन च क्रियमाणं नोपेक्षणीयम् । तत्रोभयथा दोषः । **अब्रुवन्न्** अन्येन विपरीते ऽनुष्ठीयमाने तूष्णीम् आसीनो हस्तक्षेपेण वा शास्त्रन्यायविरुद्धं[^९१] ब्रुवन् **किल्बिषी** पापभाग् भवति । तेन नैषा प्रत्याशा कर्तव्या । द्वितीयः प्राड्विवाको मिथ्या पश्यति, स एव योज्यते[^९२], अहं तूष्णींभूत उदासीनः किम् इत्य् एनसा योक्ष्य इति । सभाप्रवेशनिषेधेन चात्र व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकारप्रतिपत्तिः प्रतिषिध्यते । **सभा वा न प्रवेष्टव्येति** । व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकारो न प्रतिपादनीय इत्य् अर्थः । प्रतिपन्नश् चेत् समञ्जसं वक्तव्यम् । अनेन त्व् अनधिकृतस्यापि यदृच्छया संनिहितस्य मिथ्यापश्यत्सु सभ्येषु विदुषस् तूणींभावं नेच्छन्ति । तथा च "नियुक्तो वानियुक्तो वा धर्मज्ञो वक्तुम् अर्हति" । अथ राजपुरुषपर्यनुयोग आशङ्क्यते किम् इत्य् अनधिकृतो ब्रवीति, ततश् च तत्प्रदेशाद् अपसर्तव्यम् । तद् इदम् उक्तम्- "दुर्बलहिंसायां चाविमोचने[^९३] शक्तश् चेत्" इति (ग्ध् २१.१९) ॥ ८.१३ ॥


[^९३]:
M G J: ca vimocane


[^९२]:
M G DK: yojayati


[^९१]:
M G: śāstrānyāviruddhaṃ; DK (1: 34): śāstrājñāviruddhaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is asserted here forbids two things—(*a*) he who has accepted the
appointment (of a Judge) should not be unjust, and (*b*) he should not
slur over the injustice committed by others; since both these involve
sin.

‘*Speaks nothing*’;—*i.e*., he who remains silent when another person is
committing an injustice,—or he who interferes in the investigation and
then says what is not compatible with the scriptures or with
justice—‘*becomes tainted with sin*’—*i.e*., comes to partake of the
sin. Hence the man should not entertain the hope that—‘it is another
judge who is judging wrongly, and he may incur sin, I am only sitting
silent and indifferent, why should I he affected by the sin?’

By the prohibiting of entrance into the Court what is forbidden is the
accepting of the appointment of a judge to investigate cases; so that
what is meant by the sentence ‘*one should not enter the Court*’ is that
‘he should not accept the appointment of the investigating judge, or, if
he does accept it, he should speak out what is just.’

This has been taken to imply that when even an unauthorised person
happens.to be present, if he finds that the judges are acting wrongly,
he should not remain silent. To this end wo have the
assertion—‘Authorised or unauthorised, the man who knows what is just
should always speak out’ (*Nārada* 2.2). If he fear molestation at the
hands of the king’s officers as to why he should speak, when he is not
authorised to do so,—then he should go away from that place. In support
of this we have the following assertion—‘When a wrong is being inflicted
upon a weak person, if one does not save him from it, he incurs sin,
*only if he hag the power to gave him*’ (Gautama, 21.19).—(13)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 604);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.2), in
support, of the view that the assessors duly appointed incur sin if they
do not, check the king in the event of his taking an illegal course; but
as regards other people present, these incur sin only if they either
speak falsely or suppress the truth,—and not for not checking the
king;—and again on 2.83;—and also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p.
12a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.53, 55).—‘The man who knows Dharma can speak, whether
appointed or not appointed. Either one should not come to the Court, or
should speak truthfully. That man is a sinner who keeps silent or utters
falsehood.’

*Nārada* (3.10).—‘Either the judicial assembly must not be entered at
all, or a fair opinion should be delivered. That man who stands mute or
delivers an opinion contrary to justice, is a sinner.’

*Nārada* (3.14).—‘He who, having entered the Court, delivers a strange
opinion, ignoring the true state of the case, resembles a blind man who,
regardless, swallows fish together with the bones.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **सभा व न प्रवेष्टव्या वक्तव्यं वा समञ्जसम् ।**

व्यवहारप्रदर्शनाधिकारो वा न प्रतिपत्तव्यो राजतः सभ्यैः, वक्तव्यं वा प्रतिपन्नाधिकारैस् तत्र समञ्जसं सत्यम् । येन —

> **अब्रुवन् विब्रुवन् वापि नरो भवति किल्बिषी  ॥ ८.१३ ॥**

न केवलं विब्रुवन् किल्बिषी भवति, किं तर्हि अब्रुवन्न् अपि । अतो न "सभ्यैर् अयम् उपेक्षणीयो ऽन्यथा पश्यन् राजप्रकृतो ऽयं करोत्य् एवम्, तद् एवं न वयम्" इति नात्रौदासीन्याद् यूयम् उच्यध्वम् ॥ ८.१३ ॥

_तथा चाहुः ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

013	Either the court must not be entered, or the truth must be spoken; a man who either says nothing or speaks falsely, becomes sinful.
</details>
