+++
title = "025 बाह्यैर् विभावयेल्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall discover the internal disposition of men by external signs: by variations in their voice, colour and aspect, as also by means of the eye and by gestures.—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तथा चेदम् आह । अनुमानेनापि सत्यानृतवादिता व्यवहारतः साक्षिणां च निश्चेतव्या इति श्लोकार्थः । अतश् च स्वरादिग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम् । तेन यन् निश्चितलिङ्गं[^१०७] तेन परिच्छिन्द्याद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति, न पुनः स्वरादिभिर् एव, सव्यभिचारित्वात् तेषाम् । अनुचितसभाप्रेवेशा हि महाप्रकृतिदर्शनेन सत्यकारिणो ऽपि स्वभावतो विक्रियन्ते । प्रगल्भास् तु संवृताकारा भवन्ति । स्वरश् च वर्णश् चेङ्गितं च स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि, तेषाम् आकाराः **स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकाराः** । आकारो विकारः । स्वाभाविकानां हि स्वरादीनाम् अन्यथात्वम् । तैर् **विभावयेन्** निश्चिनुयात् । **भावम्** अभिप्रायम् अन्तर्गतं मनुष्याणां विवादिसाक्ष्यादीनाम् । तत्र स्वरस्य विकारो वाचि गद्गदरुदितादि । वर्णस्य गात्ररूपविपर्ययादि । इङ्गितं स्वेदवेपथुरोमाञ्चादि । **चक्षुषा** संभ्रमक्रोधदृष्टिपातेन । **चेष्टितेन** हस्तनिक्षेपभ्रूविक्षेपादिना[^१०८] । स्वसंवेदम्[^१०९] चैतत्, यद् गूह्यमानम् अप्य् अभिप्रायं स्वरादयः प्रकाशयन्ति निपुणतो लक्ष्यमाणाः । यतः प्रसिद्धम् एतेषां गूड्ःआभिप्रायप्रकटनसामर्थ्यम् ॥ ८.२५ ॥


[^१०९]:
     M G: tvasaṃvedam


[^१०८]:
     M G J: -vikṣepādi


[^१०७]:
     DK (1:192): niścitaṃ liṅgaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What the verse means is that in course of the investigations the
veracity or otherwise of witnesses should he found out by means of
Inference also;—and the mention of ‘voice,’ etc., is only by way of
illustration; what the meaning therefore is, is that it shall be
ascertained by means of such sure indiations as may be possible, and not
necessarily only by ‘voice’ and other things mentioned here; for the
simple reason that these latter are not always infallible; *e.g*., in
many cases persons who are not used to the presence of great men become
flurried, even though they be quite truthful; while those that are pert
manage to hide their real feelings.

The compound ‘*svaravarṇeṅgitākāraiḥ*’ is to be expounded as—by the
*ākāra*—variations in—their ‘*svara*,’ ‘voice’—‘*varṇa*’ ‘colour’—and
‘*iṅgita*,’ ‘aspect’;—the ‘change’ referred to being modifications
undergone by men’s ordinary ‘voice’ and the rest

By means of these he shall ‘*discover*’—ascertain—the ‘*internal
disposition*’— intention—‘*of men*’— of suitors and witnesses.

The ‘change of voice’ occurs in the form of *faltering*, being *choked
with tears* and so forth;—that of ‘*colour*’ in the form of sudden
changes of complexion and so forth;—that of ‘*aspect*’ in the shape of
perspiration, trembling, thrilling of hairs and so forth.

‘*By means of the eye*’;—*i.e*., by suddenly casting on them an angry
look.

‘*By gestures*,’—*i.e*., by the movement of the hands, the eye-brows and
so forth.

It is a fact of common experience that voice and the rest, if carefully
watched, disclose the most hidden feelings;—the fact of these being
indicative of hidden feelings being well known among men, as we find in
ordinary experience.—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Iṅgita*’—‘Perspiring, trembling, horripilation and so forth’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Rāghavānanda);—‘casting down the eyes &c,’
(Kullūka);—‘aimlessly moving about the arms &c.’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Ākāra*’—‘Manner’ compounded with ‘*svara-varṇa-iṅgita*’ collectively,
(Medhātithi and Rāghavānanda);—‘aspect, *e.g*., pallor, horripilation,
sweating’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka, and Nārāyaṇa) who take the term
independently—copulatively compounded with ‘*svara*’ &c.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 620);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p. II,
218),... which adds the following notes:—‘*Svara*,’ such as choking
voice,—‘*varṇa*,’ abnormal pallor and so forth,—‘iṅgita,’ *i*. *e*.,
sweating, trembling and horripilation—‘*ākāra*,’
disfigurement,—‘*cakṣuṣ*,’ timid, or piteous look,—‘*ceṣṭita*,’ the
manner of standing and moving. It adds that all these, being uncertain
indications, have to be regarded as inferior to witnesses and other
kinds of direct evidence;—in

*Kṛtykalpataru*, (21b), which has the following notes:—‘*Vibhāvayet*,’
determine, ascertain,—‘*bhāvam*,’ motive, intention, ‘*nṛṇām*,’ of the
two parties and of the witnesses,—‘*ākāra*’ transformation in the
natural voice and other things,—that of ‘*svara*’ appears in the form of
trembling and so forth, that of ‘*varṇa*’ in the shape of paleness and
so forth;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 30a), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Svara*’ stands for the choking of the voice and so
forth,—‘*varṇa*’ for the ‘darkness of complexion,’ and so
forth,—‘*iṅgita*’ for perspiration, trembling and the like,—‘*ākāra*’
for the raising of the eye-brows and so forth—‘*cakṣu*’ for the timid
look,—‘*ceṣṭita*’ for the listless changing of position.—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.25-26)**

*Nārada* (6.10-11).—‘When the face changes colour, or the voice falters,
or the features look suspicious, when they do not give evidence in
public, when they make impossible statements as to place and time, when
there are doubts regarding their place of residence, when they indulge
in expense for bad purposes, when they have been previously convicted of
larceny, when they keep bad company, or when documents speak against
them,—they may be convicted as thieves,—not by the possession of stolen
goods alone.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.13-15).—‘If he shifts his position, licks the ends of
his mouth, perspires in his forehead, his face becomes pale, speech is
dry and halting, talks much and inconsistently, is not pleasant in the
eye or in his speech, twists his lips, the natural condition of his
mind, speech and body becomes changed,—such a person, whether he be a
complainant or a witness, should be regarded as at fault or wicked.’

*Rāmāyaṇa* (Vyavahāratattva, p. 31).—‘The man cannot hide his internal
feelings entirely, without showing some slight shadow of it in his
external appearance; it becomes exposed even against his will.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वरश् च वर्णश् चङ्गितं च **स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि** । **आकारः** शरीरेन्द्रियवैकृत्यम् । स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि च तान्य् आकारश् च स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकाराः । तैः स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकारैः सामान्यविशेषधर्मेणायं निर्देशः । तत्र वैचित्र्यम् । स्वरवैकृत्यं गद्गदादिः । वर्णो गात्ररूपविपर्ययः । लिङ्गितं स्वेदवेपथुरोमाञ्चादिः । चक्षुषा चक्षुर् विकारेण । चेष्टितेन च हस्तभ्रूविक्षेपादिना । तद् एवम् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोः साक्षिणां वानृतभावभाषितं स्वरादिविपर्ययेण प्रत्यक्षम् अपि वेदनीयं विजानीयात् । सामान्यमात्रोपदेशो ऽयम् । केचित् त्व् आहुः सव्यभिचारत्वाद् अनुमानस्य व्यवहारस्थितिः साक्षिभिः स्यात्, अविद्यमानेषु तु साक्षिष्व् अनुमानम् अप्य् आश्रयणीयम् । तद् एतद् अन्याय्यम् । यद्य् अनुमानं व्यभ्चारि दृष्टं ननु साक्षिवचनागमो ऽपि तथा दृष्टः । अथात्रविवेकयत्नान् निर्णयः । एवम् अनुमानादिष्व् अपि भविष्यति । यदि चानुमानं व्यभिचारि कथम् अविद्यमानेषु साक्षिषु तन्निर्णयार्थम् उपादेयम् इत्य् आचक्षीत । तस्माद् युक्तोपदेशम् अनुमानम् । तथा च कृत्वा व्यवहाराद् अन्यत्रापि लौकिकैः ॥ ८.२५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

025	By external signs let him discover the internal disposition of men, by their voice, their colour, their motions, their aspect, their eyes, and their gestures.
</details>
