+++
title = "030 प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Property, the owner whereof has disappeared, the King shall keep for three years; up to three years the owner may receive it; but after that the King (shall take it).—(30)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् द्रव्यं स्वामिनो **नष्टं** प्रमादात् कथंचित् पथि गच्छतो भ्रष्टम्, अरण्ये कान्तारे वा स्थापयित्वारण्यपालैर् अन्यैर् वा राजपुरुषैर् लब्धं राजसकाशम् आनीतम्, तद् राज्ञा[^१२३] रक्षां कृत्वा राजद्वारे राजमार्गे वा प्रकाशं स्थापयितव्यम् । पटहघोषणेन वा कस्य किं हारितम् इति प्रकाशयितव्यम् । यतः प्रदेशाल् लब्धं तस्मिन्न् एव प्रदेशे रक्षिपुरुषाधिष्ठितं कर्तव्यम् । एवं **त्रीणि** वर्षाणि स्थापयितव्यम् । तत्र्**आर्वाक्** **त्रिभ्यो** वर्षेभ्यो यः कारणत आत्मीयं ज्ञापयेत् तस्योद्धृतवक्ष्यमाणषड्भागादिभागकं समर्पयितव्यम्, परतः स्वकोष्ठे प्रवेशनीयाम् इति ।


[^१२३]:
     M G DK (1: 1953) add: svāṃ

- प्रनष्टः स्वामी यस्य रिक्थस्य तत् **प्रनष्टस्वामिकम् ।** **प्रनष्टो** ऽविज्ञातः । **रिक्थं** धनम् । त्रयाणाम् अब्दानां समाहारस् **त्र्यब्दम् ।** त्रिवर्षवत् त्र्यब्दे ङीबभावः । अब्दशब्दः संवत्सरपर्यायः । **निधापयेत्** स्थापयेत् । **अर्वाक् त्र्यब्दात्** पूर्वं त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्यः, **हरेत् स्वामी** स्वीकुर्यात् । **अर्वाक्**शब्दो ऽवधौ दिग्देशादिकात् पूर्वम्[^१२४] आह ।


[^१२४]:
     M G DK: digdeśādikān pūrvān

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अन्ये</u> तु **नृपतिर् हरेद्** इति भोगानुज्ञानम् अपहारम् आहुः । न हि ऊर्ध्वम् अपि त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्यः परकीयस्य द्रव्यसापहारो युक्तः । तस्मात् त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्य ऊर्ध्वम् अनागच्छति स्वामिनि राज्ञा[^१२५] भोक्तव्यम् । 


[^१२५]:
     J: rājñā svāmini 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">तैर्</u>[^१२६] अयं श्लोकः कथं व्याख्यानीयः- "यत् किंचिद् दशवर्षाणि" (म्ध् ८.१४७) इति । यदि च परकीयस्यापहारो न युक्त इत्य् उच्यते भोगो ऽपि नैव युक्तः । परकीयं[^१२७] वस्त्रादिवद् भुज्यमानं नश्यत्य् एव । तत्रानपहारोपचारो युक्तः, भुक्तेर्[^१२८] एवापहारफलस्य सद्भावात् । गजतुरगादेस्[^१२९] तु कीदृशो भोग इति वाच्यम् । तस्मान् न यथाश्रुतार्थत्यागे कारणम् अस्ति । हरतिश् च गृह्णात्यर्थे असकृद् दृष्टप्रयोग **ऋक्थं हरेद्** इत्यादौ । तस्त्मात् **परेण नृपतिर् हरेत्** स्वीकुर्याद् इत्य् अयम् एवार्थः ॥ ८.३० ॥


[^१२९]:
     M G: japamudrādes


[^१२८]:
     M G DK: tatrānapahāravācoyuktir evāpahāraphalasya


[^१२७]:
     M G: parakīyasya


[^१२६]:
     M G: tad

_कथं पुनः स्वामी प्रनष्टे धने स्वामित्वं ज्ञापयेत् । अत_[^१३०] _आह_ ।


[^१३०]:
     M G DK: jñāpayitum alam
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When some one has lost something,—it having dropped on the ground while
he was going along the road, or in the forest,—and the conservator of
the forests, or some other official of the King, finds it and brings it
to the King,—the King shall arrange for its safe keeping and have it
kept exposed to view at the royal gate or on the public road, and made
it known by heat of drum if any one has lost anything; or he shall have
it kept in charge of keepers on the spot where it was found. For three
years he shall thus keep it.

Then, before the lapse of three years, if some one reports with proofs
that the property belongs to him, then it should he made over to him,
after deducting the sixth part of it, which is said (in verse MM) to be
the King’s share; and after the lapse of three years the King shall take
the property into his own treasury.

That ‘*riktha*,’ ‘property,’ is said to be ‘*praṇaṣṭasvāmika*,’ of which
the owner has ‘*disappeared*’—*i.e*., cannot he traced.

‘*Tryabdam*’ denotes the *aggregate of three years*; the feminine affix
being absent, just as it is in the compound ‘*trivarṣam*.’ The term
‘*abda*’ is synonymous with ‘year.’

‘*Shall keep*’—shall have it deposited.

‘*Up to three years*,’—*i.e*., before the period of three years is
over,—‘*the owner may receive it*,’—assert, his ownership.

The term ‘*arvāk*,’ ‘*up to*’ denotes *limit*, and indicates priority of
time or place.

Others have explained the sentence ‘*the king shall lake it*’ to convey
the permission to him to enjoy the property. What these people mean is
that even after the lapse of throe years, it would, not be right for the
King to ‘take’ or possess what belongs to another person; and hence what
is meant is that after the lapse of three years, if the lightful owner
does not turn up, the King shall enjoy the usufruct of the property.

But how will these people explain the verse ‘Whatever an owner sees
enjoyed by others during ten years, and though present, says nothing,
that he shall not recover’ (8.117)? Further, if it he asserted that the
‘taking away’ of another man’s property cannot be right,—then the
*using* also of such property cannot be right. Specially as another
man’s property in the shape of clothing and the like, becomes unfit by
use. For these reasons it is only right that the mention of ‘taking
away’ should he taken to mean actual *possession*; specially as
*enjoyment*, which is the fruit of *possession*, would be present
(according to the other view also). Then again, what sort of ‘enjoyment
of usufruct’ would there ho in the case of such property as the
elephant, the house and the like?

Thus then, there is no reason for abandoning the direct literal meaning
of the words; specially as the root ‘*hṛ*,’ ‘to take away,’ has often
been found to be used in the sense of *possession*, as in such phrase
‘*riktham haret*,’ ‘shall take possession of the property.’ Hence what
the sentence means is that after three years the King shall
‘take’—*i.e*., take possession of—the property.—(30)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule is meant for only such property as does not belong to a
Brāhmaṇa—says Nandana.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 778), which notes that the rule
(relating to the keeping of the property for three years) pertains to
the case of property belonging to Brāhmaṇas with exceptional
qualifications;—in *Mitākṣarā* on 2.38, which notes that the meaning is
that for three years, the property must be kept in safe custody; if the
owner turns up before the lapse of one year, the entire property should
be handed over to him; but if he turns up after one year then a portion
of the property is to be taken by the king as fee for keeping it; the
proportion being specified below in verse 33; it adds that the last
clause, permits the king to spend the property after three years, only
in the case of the owner not turning up at all.—It is quoted again under
1.173, where it is noted that the period of three years is meant for the
case of the owner being a Brāhmaṇa ‘endowed with learning and
character.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226), which notes that this only
permits the king to *make use* of the property (not to make it his own).
In view of what the *Mitākṣarā* and *Aparārka* have said, it is
interesting to note that *Madnapārijāta* reads ‘*abdam*’ and ‘*abdāt*’,
which clearly puts down the period as *one year* only.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which also notes that the
rules refer to the property of a Brāhmaṇa learned in the Veda.

This is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 266), which adds the
following notes:—Reading this text along with *Yājñavalkya* (2-33), we
take the rule to be that, if the owner turns up before the lapse of one
year, the entire property should be made over to him, but if after that,
the king should take from it his own share;—for three years he should
keep the property in the same condition in which it was found; and after
that he is permitted to spend out of it;—and if the owner turns up after
three years, then the king should take out of it his own share, which
should be equal to that of the owner,—giving the fourth part of the
royal share to the man who found the property.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, p. 36a and Vyavahāra, p. 27b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.36-38).—‘Those who find lost, property, the owner of which
is not known, shall report it to the King. The King shall cause it to be
proclaimed and hold it in his custody for a year. After that one-fourth
of the value of the property goes to the finder and the remainder to the
King.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.19-20).—‘Property entirely given up goes to the King. If
it be otherwise, the King with his ministers and the citizens shall
administer it.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.33).—‘The property lost and found, the King shall make
over to him to whom it belongs; if he fails to substantiate with proofs
his claim to it, he shall he punished with fine equal to the value of
the property.’

Do. (2.172).—‘If a man obtains from another person the property that had
been stolen or lost,—without reporting it to the King—he should he fined
96 *Paṇas*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.173).—‘When a stolen or lost property is brought to the
King by the customs-officers or by village-officers, the owner thereof
shall get it if he turns up before one year; after that the King shall
take it himself.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.16-17).—(Same as Manu.)

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 96).—‘If the owner of the lost property proves his
ownership, he obtains what had been lost and recovered. If he fails to
prove his ownership, he is fined the fifth part of the value of the
article: and the article becomes the lawful property of the King; if the
owner takes forcible possession of the article lost and found, he is to
he fined the first amercement. Property lost and found should remain
deposited in the Customs Office; and after three fortnights, it is to he
handed over to the rightful owner or surrendered to the royal treasury.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परेण त्र्यब्दान् नष्टस्वामिकस्य धनस्य राज्ञो भोगानुज्ञा, नापहरणम् अस्य । येनोर्ध्वम् अपि त्र्यब्दात् स्वामिन्य् आगते न युक्तं तद् अपहर्तुम्, न हि शक्यं न्यायविरोधेन शास्त्रविरोधेन चार्थकल्पनायां परस्वग्रहणम् अभ्यनुज्ञातुम् । न चार्वाक् त्र्यब्दाद् धरेत् स्वामीत्य् अनेनोर्ध्वं त्र्यब्दात् स्वामिनो ऽस्वामित्वम् इत्य् उच्यते । किं तर्हि परेण नृपतिर् हरेद् इत्य् अस्य भोगो ऽतिसर्गविधेर् वा संबन्धो ऽनूद्यते वाक्यस्वाभाव्यात् । एवं च सत्य् ऊर्ध्वम् अपि त्र्यब्दाद् आगत्य —
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

030	Property, the owner of which has disappeared, the king shall cause to be kept as a deposit during three years; within the period of three years the owner may claim it, after (that term) the king may take it.
</details>
