+++
title = "041 जाति-जानपदान् धर्मान्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king knowing his duty shall determine the law for each man, after haying duly examined the provincial laws pertaining to each caste, the law’s of guilds, as also the laws of families.—(11)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कुरुकापिशकाश्मीरादिदेशो नियतावधिः जनपदम् । तत्र भवा धर्मा **जानपदाः** । केचित्[^१५०] तत्र भवन्ति ये तद्देशव्यपदेशैर् अनुष्ठीयन्ते । अथ वा तन्निवासिनो जना मञ्चाः क्रोशन्तीतिवत् जनपदशब्देनाभिधीयन्ते । तेषाम् अनुष्ठेया जानपदाः । "तस्येदम्" (पाण् ४.३.१२९) इति तद्धितः । जातेर् जानपदा **जातिजानपदा** इति षष्ठीसमासः । जातिमात्रविषया देशधर्मा राज्ञा परिपालनीयाः । **समीक्ष्य** विचार्य — किम् आम्नायैर् विरुद्धा अथ न, तथा पीडाकराः कस्यचिद् उत न — एवं विचार्य, ये ऽविरुद्धाश् तान् **प्रतिपादयेद्** अनुष्टापयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । तथा च वक्ष्यति "सद्भिर् आचरितं यत् स्यात्" (म्ध् ८.४६) इति । 


[^१५०]:
     M G DK (1: 76): kiṃ ca

- अथ वा जातयश् च ते जानपदाश् चेति विशेषणसमासः । जातिशब्देन च नित्यत्वं लक्ष्यते । प्रशंसामात्रं चैतत् देशधर्माणाम् । यथा जातिर् नित्या एवं[^१५१] देशधर्मा अपि शास्त्राविरुद्धा नित्याः । ते नित्यवद् अनुष्ठेया दृष्टार्था[^१५२] गोप्रचारोदकक्षरणादयः । यथा ग्रामीणा अत्र प्रदेशे गावो न चारणीया इति समयम् आश्रयन्ति कस्यचित् कार्यस्य सिद्ध्यर्थं तत्र यो व्यतिक्रामति स राज्ञा दण्ड्यः । 


[^१५२]:
     M G: dṛṣṭārtho


[^१५१]:
     M G DK omit: deśadharmāṇām | yathā jātir nityā evaṃ

- अथ वा जनपदे भवा **जानपदा** देशनिवासिन उच्यन्ते । जात्या जानपदा **जातिजानपदाः** । जातिर् जन्मोत्पत्तिर् इति यावत् । एतेन देशसंबन्धस्य[^१५३] पुरुषाणां नित्यता लक्ष्यते । ये तद्देशजास् तद्देशाभिजनास् तन्निवासिनश् च गृह्यन्ते, तेषां सर्वविशेषणविशिष्टानाम्[^१५४] अनिदंप्रथमतो जाता ये धर्मास् ते जातिजानपादशब्देनोच्यन्ते । "वृद्धाच् छः" (पाण् ४.२.११४) इति तद्धिते प्रसक्ते छान्दसत्वाद् अणेव कृतः । 


[^१५४]:
     M G: -viśeṣaṇāviśiṣṭānām


[^१५३]:
     M G: deśabandhasya

- अथ वाभेदोपचारात् पुरुषशब्दस् तत्संबन्धिषु धर्मेषु प्रयुक्तः । तेनायं[^१५५] देशनियमो धर्माणां स एवंविधात् पुरुषात् प्रतिद्रष्टव्यः । एते हि देशधर्मा म्लेच्छानां[^१५६] न पुनर् आर्याणाम् । ते[^१५७] हि तिर्यक्समानधर्माणो ऽन्यत्रानधिकृताः स्वसमाचारप्रसिद्धं धर्मम् अनुतिष्ठन्ति मातृविवाहादि[^१५८] । सो ऽयं[^१५९] सार्वभौमेन न[^१६०] निवारणीयः । स्वदेशाचारवतां तेषां जातिधर्मो ऽयं[^१६१] जनपदनिवासबन्धेनाभ्यनुज्ञानात्,[^१६२] आम्नायविरोधो[^१६३] ऽप्य् अत्र नास्ति । अधिकृतानां विरोधात् विरोधो न तिरश्चाम् ।


[^१६३]:
     M G DK: āmnāye virodho


[^१६२]:
     M G DK: jananivāsa-


[^१६१]:
     M G DK omit: so 'yaṃ


[^१६०]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^१५९]:
     M G DK omit: so 'yaṃ


[^१५८]:
     M G: -vivāhādiḥ


[^१५७]:
     M G DK: na


[^१५६]:
     M G DK: deśānāṃ


[^१५५]:
     M G DK: etenāyaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> "अहिंसा सत्यम् अक्रोधः शौचम् इन्द्रियसंयमः" (म्ध् १०.६३) इति प्रतिलोमाधिकारेणैवोक्तम् । म्लेच्छाश् च प्रतिलोमा[^१६४] एव । तत्र यदि मातृविवाहे मूत्रोत्सर्गे चोदकशुद्ध्यभावे न दुष्यति, क इन्द्रियसंयमः कीदृशं वा शौचम् इति । 


[^१६४]:
     M G DK: cāpratilomā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">उक्तम्</u> एतत् । आर्यावर्तमध्यवर्तिनाम्[^१६५] एते धर्माः शौचादयः । चातुर्वर्ण्ये तु तत्तद्देशनियमो[^१६६] धर्माणां नास्ति । केचिद् अदृष्टार्था देशधर्मा इति वक्ष्यामः । 


[^१६६]:
     M G DK: taddeśaniyamo


[^१६५]:
     M G DK: āryāvartinām

एककार्यापन्ना वणिक्कारुकुसीदिचातुरिकादयः[^१६७] । तेषां धर्माः **श्रेणीधर्माः** । यथा केचन वणिङ्महत्तरा वचनेन परिच्छिन्नं राज्ञो भागं प्रयच्छन्ति — "इमां वणिज्यां वयम् उपजीवाम एष ते राजभागो ऽस्माकं यावल् लाभो ऽस्तु न्यूनो ऽधिको वा" । तत्र राज्ञाभ्युपगते वणिज्ये लाभातिशयार्थं राष्ट्रविरोधिनीं चेतरेतरव्यवस्थां कुर्वन्ति — इदं द्रव्यम् इयन्तं कालम् अविक्रेयम्, अयं राज्ञो ऽपदेशेनार्थो[^१६८] दण्डः पतति, देवतोत्सवार्थो वा । तत्र यदि कश्चिद् व्यतिक्रामति स एवं श्रेणीधर्मव्यतिक्रामन् दण्ड्यः ।  

**कुलधर्मा** इति । कुलं वंशः । तत्र प्रख्यातमहिम्ना पूर्वजेन धर्मः प्रवर्तितो भवति यो ऽस्मद्वंशजः कुतश्चन धनं लभेत स नादत्वा ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ऽन्यत्र विनियुञ्जीतेत्यादयो धर्माः । तथा, सति योग्यत्वे य एव पूर्वपुरुषाणां याजकाः कन्यादिसंप्रदानभूता वा त एव कार्याः[^१६९] । तदतिक्रामन् राज्ञो ऽनुष्ठापयितव्यः । एतेषां च सामवायिकत्वाद् अधर्मत्वशङ्कया पुनर्वचनम् । न चायं संविद्व्यतिक्रम इति वक्ष्यामः ॥ ८.४१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Kuru, Kāśī, Kaśmīra and other regions with fixed boundaries are called
‘provinces,’ and laws obtaining in those are called ‘*provincial*’; by
which are meant those laws that are observed by the people living in the
province and called after it. Or, the term ‘province’ may stand for the
inhabitants of the provinces, just as the men on the platform are called
the ‘platform,’ when it is said that ‘the platforms are crying’; and the
laws observed by these people would, in that case, he called
‘*provincial*’;—the nominal affix ‘aṇ’ being added in accordance with
Pāṇini 4.3.120.

The compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ* is to be compounded as
‘*jāteḥ-jānapadāh*’; the meaning being ‘those provincial laws that
pertain to each caste’; and these have to be maintained by the king.

‘*Having examined*,’—*i.e*., duly considered the following points—(*a*)
are these law’s contrary to the scriptures or not? (*b*) are they the
source of trouble to some people or not?

After having duly considered all this, he shall ‘*determine*’—cause to
be observed—those laws that are found, on examination, to be not
incompatible (with the scriptures or with the people’s convenience); as
it is going to be declared later on (verse 46)—‘What may have been
practised by the good, etc., etc.’

Or, the compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ*’ may be expounded in such a manner as
to make ‘*jāti*’ the qualification of ‘*janapada*’; the term ‘*jāti*’ in
this case would indicate *eternality*, and would be only a laudatory
epithet to ‘provincial laws’; the idea being that ‘just as genus is
something eternal, so are the provincial laws also, in so far as they
are not contrary to the scriptures’; all such visibly useful acts as the
feeding of cattle, the storing of water in reservoirs and so forth being
such as ought to be performed at all times.

Thus the meaning is that when the men of a certain village have laid
down the rule that ‘cattle should not be taken to graze at such and such
places,’ then if some one, for some purpose of his own, breaks this
rule,—he shall be punished by the king.

Or, the term ‘*jānapada*’ may stand for *those born in the province*;
*i.e*., the inhabitants of the province; and the compound
‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ being expounded as ‘*jātyā jānapadāḥ*,’ and ‘*jāti*’
standing fot *birth*,—it would signify the eternal relationship between
the *province* and the men *born* there; and the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ
dharmāḥ*’ would stand for *those laws whose beginning cannot be traced,
and which relate to the duly qualified persons among those born and
living in a particular province*. And though in this case the proper
nominal affix to use would have been ‘*cha*’ (giving the form
*jānapadīya*), according to Pāṇini 5.2.114, yet it is the ‘*aṇ*’-affix
that has been used; this anomaly being permissible as a ‘Vedic anomaly.’

Or, it may be that the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ though directly denoting
the *inhabitants*, has been applied here to their *laws*,—the two being
regarded as identical; so that the phrase serves to restrict the scope
of the law referred to,—this restriction being deduced from the men
themselves; the sense thus is that the laws referred to pertain only to
the men of certain localities, and not to all the *Ārgas*,—the former
being such as have a morality akin to that of the lower animals, and not
entitled to the performance of any other duties, they perform only such
acts as are in keeping with their own customs; such, for instance, as
the marrying of their own mother and so forth;—and as such in the
performance of such acts, these men shall not be prevented by the king
having his sway over the whole world (thence also over the barbarians);
because such practices ane permitted by their ‘tribal custom,’
sanctioned by the geographical position oi the locality inhabited by
them. Nor could such practices he regarded as ‘contrary to the
scriptures’; because the *incompatibility* *of scriptures* has a meaning
only for persons entitled to the scriptural acts, and not to lower
beings.

An objection is raised—“In Manu (10.63), such duties as *h*
*armlessness, truthfulness*, *absence of anger*, *purity* and *control
of the senses* have been laid down in reference to the irregularly mixed
castes; and *barbarians* also belong to the same category as those
castes; so that if such men would not he committing something wrong in
marrying their mother, or in not using water after urinating, what sort
of ‘control of the senses’ or ‘purity’ would there be for them?”

This has been already answered. Purity and other duties pertain to the
inhabitants of the whole of Āryāvarta; and so far as the four castes are
concerned, there is no restriction of place regarding the duties
pertaining to them.

Some people have held that the restriction as to the locality of the
‘laws’ pertains to some transcendental results;—as we shall point out
later on.

There are people following a common profession; such, as tradesmen,
artisans, money-lenders, coach-drivers and so forth; and the laws
governing these are ‘guild-laws.’ *E.g*., certain principal tradesmen
offer to the king his royal tax fixed upon verbally by their declaring
before the king—‘we are living by this trade, let the tax thereupon be
fixed at such and such a rate, be our profits more or less’; now on the
king agreeing to this, they join together and lay down certain rates
among themselves, which are calculated to bring thorn larger profits and
likely to be detrimental to the interests of the kingdom,—*e.g*., (*a*)
‘Such and such a commodity should not be sold during such and such a
time,’ (*a*) ‘such and such is to be the tax payable either to the king
or towards the celebration of some religious festival,’ and so forth.
And if any one transgresses such rules, he shall be punished for acting
against ‘guild-laws.’

‘*Laws of families*’;—‘Family’ means *race*; some remote ancestor of
well-known fame may have laid down the rule—‘whenever any of my
descendants earns wealth, he shall not make use of it without having
first given something out of it to Brāhmaṇas’;—and such rules are what
are meant by ‘laws of families’; or such rules as ‘priests and
bridegrooms shall be selected out of those same families out of which
they have been selected by one’s forefathers, provided that suitable men
are available therefrom.’ One who acts against such laws shall be
punished by the king.

These have been reiterated here with a view to preclude the idea that
such laws govern only particular groups of men and as such cannot he
regarded as ‘Equity’ proper.

The transgression of these laws does not fall within the category of
‘Breach of Contract,’ as we shall show later on.—(41).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Jānapada*’—‘Of districts’ (Medhātithi, and Kullūka Govindarāja);—‘of
the inhabitants of one and the same village’ (Nārāyaṇa).

The customs here referred to are those that are not repugnant to the
Scriptures (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 65), which has
the following notes:—‘*Śreṇi-dharma*’ customs established among such
communities as those of the tradesmen and artisans, *e*.*g*., ‘such and
such things are not to be sold on such a day’,—‘*Kuladharma*;’ *e.g*.,
‘in this family the piercing of the ears is to be done in the fifth
year’in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 6b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p.
9b), which has the following notes:—‘*Jātijānapada*’, laws relating to
tribes, castes and to localities,—‘*Śreṇī*’ stands for the corporation
of persons belonging to the same profession,—‘*Svadharma*’, the law
promulgated by the king himself.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.10, 11, 20, 21).—‘Those who leave the path of duty, he
shall lead back to it;—for it is declared that he obtains a share of the
spiritual merit gained by his subjects. The laws of countries, castes
and families, which are not opposed to the scriptures, also have
authority. Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans
have authority to lay down regulations for their respective classes.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.1).—‘The above considerations dispose also of the law
of custom which is observed in countries or families.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.2.1-8).—‘There is a difference of opinion regarding live
practices in the South and in the North. He who follows those practices
in any other country than where they prevail, commits sin; for each of
those practices, the custom of the country should he the authority.
Gautama declares that this is wrong; and one should not take heed of any
of these practices, because they are opposed to the traditions of the
cultured.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘Manu has declared that the peculiar laws of
countries, castes, and families may he followed in the absence of
revealed texts.’

Do. (19.7).—‘Let the King, paying attention to all the laws of
countries, castes and families, make the four castes fulfil their
particular duties.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.3).—‘To keep the four castes and the four orders firm in the
practice of their several duties.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.360).—‘Families, castes, guilds, corporations and the
provinces,—when those deviate from the paths of their duty, the King
should check them and bring them round to the right path.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.89-91)—‘The King should perform his duty by carefully
studying the customs that are followed in countries and are mentioned in
the scriptures, as well as those that are practised by castes, villages,
corporations and families. Those customs that have been introduced in
the country, caste or race should be maintained in the same condition;
for otherwise the people get perplexed.’

*Nārada* (1.7).—‘Families, guilds, corporations, one appointed by the
King and the King himself are invested with the power to decide
law-suits,—each succeeding one being superior to the one preceding in
order.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.26-30).—‘Cultivators, artisans, artists, money-lenders,
persons belonging to particular religious sects and robbers should
adjust their disputes according to the rules of their own profession.
The King shall cause the disputes of ascetics and of persons versed in
sorcery and witchcraft to be settled by persons familiar with the three
Vedas, and not decide them himself, for fear of rousing their
resentment. Relatives, companies of artisans, assemblies, and other
persons duly authorised by the King should decide law-suits among men,
excepting causes concerning violent crimes; Meetings of Kindred,
companies of artisans, assemblies and chief judges are declared to he
the resorts for the passing of sentences,—to whom he whose cause has
been previously tried may appeal in succession.’

*Bṛhaspati* (2.26.28).—‘When a decision is passed in accordance with
local custom, logic or the opinion of traders, the issue of the case is
over-ruled by it. When the King, disregarding established custom, passes
sentence, it is called the *edict of the king*, and local custom is
over-ruled by it. The time-honoured institutions of each country, caste
and family should be preserved intact; otherwise the people would rise
in rebellion.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

जातिधर्मः प्रसिद्धः । [जाति ब्राह्मणादिः, तच् च नित्य]त्वेनोच्यते, शास्त्रलक्षणत्वात् । जानपदः सामयिकः, न शास्त्रप्रमाणः, गोप्रचारोदकरक्षणादिः । श्रेणीधर्मो वणिक्कारुककुशीलवानां स्वकार्यसिद्ध्यर्थं प्रवर्ति[तः । त]म् अपि धर्मं राजा प्रतिपादयेत् । न सामयिको ऽयम् इत्य् अनास्था कर्तव्या । यदि च राजा सामायिकेष्व् अनादरं कुर्यात्, ततो व्यवस्थाभङ्गा मात्स्यन्यायः प्रवर्तते ॥ ८.४१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

041	(A king) who knows the sacred law, must inquire into the laws of castes (gati), of districts, of guilds, and of families, and (thus) settle the peculiar law of each.
</details>
