+++
title = "046 सद्भिर् आचरितम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What may be found to have been observed in practice by the good and the righteous twice-born men, that he shall ordain for countries, families and castes,—provided that it is not antagonistic.—(46)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सन्तः** प्रतिषिद्धवर्जकाः, **धार्मिकाः** विहितानुष्ठायिनः । यद्य् अप्य् एक एव शब्द उभयम् अर्थं प्रतिपादयितुं शक्नोति तथापि भेदोपानानाद् विषयविभागेनैवं व्याख्यायते । तैर् **यद् आचरितम्** अनुपलभ्यमानश्रुतिस्मृतिवाक्यं **तद् देशकुलजातीनां प्रकल्पयेद्** अनुष्ठापयेत् । **अविरुद्धं** श्रुतिस्मृतिभिर् उपलभ्यमानाभिः । यद् उक्तम् "जातिजानपदान् धर्मान्" (म्ध् ८.४१) इत्य् अत्र श्लोके देशकुलाद्याचारस्य प्रामाण्यम्, तस्यानेन विशेषः कथ्यते । आम्नायेनाविरोधे[^१७६] तत् प्रमाणम्, न विरोधे तत् प्रमाणम् । तेन दृष्टार्थान्य् अपि ग्रामदेशराजकार्याणि शास्त्राविरुद्धान्य् आदरणीयानि, न विरुद्धानि । यथा क्वचिद् देश ऋणिक आत्मानं विक्रय्य धनं दाप्यते । तच् च "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इत्य् अनेन विरुद्धम् । अन्यच् च श्लोकेन दर्शितम् । अन्यस्य त्व् आचारस्य शिष्टसंबन्धितयैव प्रामाण्यम् उक्तम् "आचारश् चैव साधूनाम्" (म्ध् २.६) इति । न च तद्विरुद्धार्थसमाचरणेन साधुत्वम् उपपद्यते । तस्माद् यन् नादृष्टाय[^१७७] तद्विषयो ऽयम् उपदेशः ।


[^१७७]:
     M G DK (1:77): tasmāc ca nādṛṣṭāya (not in DK 5: 118)


[^१७६]:
     M G J DK 1: 77: -āvirodhena (I follow DK 5: 118; see na virodhe in the second half of the sentence)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अन्यस्</u> त्व् आह । देशान्तरे धार्मिकैः सद्भिर् द्विजैर् यद् अविरुद्धं[^१७८] श्रुत्या स्मृत्यन्तरेण वाचर्यते तद् देशान्तरे ऽपि राजा प्रकल्पयेत् । यथा उद्वृषभयज्ञादय उदीच्येषु प्रसिद्धास् ते प्राच्यैर् दाक्षिणात्यैः प्रतीच्यैश् चानुष्ठेयाः । कुतः । आचाराद् धि स्मृतिर् अनुमातव्या, स्मृतेः श्रुतिः । सा च यद्य् एवम् अनुमीयते "उदीच्यैर् एतत् कर्तव्यम्" इति, तत्र तद्धितस्य बहुष्व् अर्थेषु स्मरणात् "तत्र जातः" (पाण् ४.३.२५), "तत्र भवः" (पाण् ४.३.५३), "तत आगतः" (पान् ४.३.७४), तम् अभिप्रस्थितः "शेषे" (पाण् ४.२.९२) इति चैतस्य लक्षणविकारोभयरूपत्वाद्[^१७९] अन्येष्व् अप्य् अर्थेषु प्रतिपदम् अनुपातेषु[^१८०] तद्धितस्मरणान् नास्त्य् उदीच्यो नाम, य उदीच्यशब्देन निवर्त्येत । ततश् च पुरुषमात्रेणैतत् कर्तव्यम् इत्य् आपतति, देशसमाख्याया नियतनिमित्तत्वाभावेनानियामकत्वात् । अथैवं वाक्यम् अनुमीयेत- "उदीच्यां जातेन तद्देशवासिना वा," तद् अपि व्यभिचारि । तत्र जातो ऽपि[^१८१] नान्यत्र करोति, तन्निवास्य् अप्य् अन्यत्र जातो न करोत्य् एव । अथ "उदग्देशाभिजनस् तन्निवासी च" इति- अनित्यत्वाद्[^१८२] अभिजननिवासयोस् तद् अपि न युक्तम् एव । न हि जातिगुणगोत्राणीवाभिजननिवासौ नित्यौ । तस्मान् नित्यस्य[^१८३] कस्यचिद् अनुष्ठातॄणाम् अवछेदकस्यानुपपत्तेः सर्वविषया धर्माः । न देशधर्मा नाम केचन सन्ति । अनेनैव न्यायेन कुलधर्मा अपि । 


[^१८३]:
     M G add: na; DK add: ca


[^१८२]:
     J: nityatvād


[^१८१]:
     M G: tavato 'pi; DK (1: 78) tajjāto 'pi


[^१८०]:
     DK 5: 118: anupātteṣu (not in DK 1: 77)


[^१७९]:
     DK (1: 77; 5: 118): lakṣaṇādhikārobhaya- 


[^१७८]:
     M G: yadi viruddhaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथं</u> तर्हि "देशधर्माः कुलधर्माः" इति च स्मृतिकारैर् भेदेन व्यपदिश्यन्ते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">उक्तं</u> दृष्टार्था नियता व्यवस्था । तत्र धर्मस् तस्य च नियम उपपद्यत इति उक्तम् । कुलं च गोत्रैकदेशः । यस् तु कृत्स्नगोत्रधर्मः, यथा "न वासिष्ठा वैश्वामित्रैः संबध्नीयुः"[^१८४] इति, स नित्यत्वाद् गोत्रव्यपदेशस्य नित्य एवेति[^१८५] विरम्यते ॥ ८.४६ ॥


[^१८५]:
     M G: tāny asyeti; DK nānyasyeti


[^१८४]:
     M G DK: vaiśvāmitram avadhīr

_यत् सर्वेषु व्यवहारपदेषु साधारणं तद् उक्तम् । विशेषविवक्षायाम् इदम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Good*’—those who eschew what is forbidden;—‘*righteous*’—those who do
what is enjoined. Though either one of these two words would have
sufficed to express what is meant, yet they have both been used; that is
the reason why we have explained them as having two different
meanings.—What is practised by such persons, and in support of which we
do not find any *Śruti* or *Smṛti* texts,—‘*that he shall ordain*’—cause
to be acted up to—‘*for countries, families and castes*’;—‘*provided
that it is not antagonistic*’—to directly perceptible *Śruti* and
*Smṛti* texts.

Verse 41 has declared the authoritative character of ‘provincial laws,
laws of families, etc., etc.’; and the present verse adds the
qualification that such laws shall be not opposed to the scriptures.
Local and king-made laws also, even when they pertain to temporal
affairs, are to be obeyed only when they are not contrary to the
scriptures. For instance, in some places the debtor is made to repay the
debt by selling himself; and this is contrary to the Smṛti text—‘by
service also the debt may be liquidated, etc.’ (*Manu*, 177); as is
shown under that verse. Further, under 2.6, the authority of *Practice*
(usage) has been explained as based only upon the fact of its being
connected with (observed by) cultured men; and no man can be called
‘cultured’ if he acts contrary to the scriptures. Hence the present
Terse is meant to be applicable to such practices as do not pertain to
spiritual matters.

Another writer explains the text as follows:—What is practised by the
good and righteous twice-born men in one country, the king should
introduce in another country also, if it is found to ho not antagonistic
to *Śruti* and *Smṛti* texts. *E.g*., the bull-sacrifice and other
similar acts that are well known among the people of the North should be
made to be performed by the people of the East, South and West also.
Because from usage, we deduce the corresponding *Smṛti*, and from this
latter the corresponding *Śruti*; so that if the text thus deduced on
the strength of the practice of the northerners were in some such form
as that such and such a sacrifice shall he performed by the *udīcyas,
people of the north*’—then since the nominal affix conveys several such
meanings,—such as (*a*) birth, (*b*) source, (*c*) origin, (*d*)
destination and (*e*) supplement,—all which fall within one or other of
the two categories of ‘distinctive’ feature and ‘modification,’—none of
these as denoted by the nominal affix in the term ‘*udīcya*’ could help
to mark off any people that could be called ‘*udīcya*’ ‘northerner’; so
that the meaning of the said deduced text would come to be that *every
man* should perform the act in question; specially as the exact
denotation of names of countries is always vague. Even if the text
deduced were in the form—‘the act is to be done by one who is born in
the north, or who lives in that country,’—then this would not be
compatible with facts; since as a matter of fact, a man, even though
horn in a particular country, does not follow its usage when he lives
elsewhere, or even though a man may be living in a certain country, he
does not adopt its practice if he is not born there. If again, the terms
used were ‘the native or inhabitant of such and such a country,’ then
also, in as much as *nativity* and *habitation* are always uncertain,
this also would not be right; neither *nativity* nor *habitation* is
fixed to the same extent as one’s *caste* or *qualities* or *race*. Thus
there being no such term as would infallibly single out the performers
of the acts in question, they should he taken as to be performed by all
men; so that there is no such thing as ‘local usage.’ The same reasoning
holds good regarding ‘family usage’ also.

“If this is so, then how is it that *smṛti-writers* mention ‘local
usage,’ ‘family usage’ and ‘caste-usage’ as distinct from one another?”

It has been already explained that the restriction of the acts concerned
is for temporal purposes; and in this sense the restriction regarding
acts is quite reasonable.

‘*Family*’ is a part of ‘race.’ The duty that is laid down for the
entire *race*,—such as people of the Vaśiṣṭha-race shall not mix with
those of the Viśvāmitra-race,’—are to be regarded as binding, since
race-names are fixed for all time.—(46)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to Medhātithi this verse permits the king to admit the
authority of only such local and family customs and practices as are
*not contrary to Śruti and Smṛti*,—Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda,
however, take it to mean that he is to accept as authority only such
scriptural rules of conduct *as are not contrary to local and family
customs*,—According to ‘others’ (mentioned by Medhātithi) what, the
verse means is that ‘whatever virtuous practices the king finds being
followed in one country, those he shall introduce in other countries
also, if they are not contrary to scriptural texts.’

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 25), which says
that family and country customs are to be regarded as right, but only
when they are not repugnant to *Śruti* and other authoritative sources
of knowledge.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.20).—‘The laws of countries, castes and families, which
are not opposed to sacred texts, have authority.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.1).—‘The law of custom observed in particular
countries and families.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 58).—‘Therefore the King shall
decide suits according to the scriptures; in the absence of texts
bearing upon the subject, he shall come to a decision on the basis of
the custom obtaining in the land. That is called the *custom* of a land
which has been followed for all time and which is not repugnant to Śruti
or Smṛti.’

*Pitāmaha* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 58).—‘Whatever is done by the
elders,—be it right or wrong,—in accordance with the practice prevalent
in the land or in the family, is called *custom*. For villages,
corporations, cities, guilds, traders and army, suits should be dealt
with according to custom;—so says Bṛhaspati. When the dispute lies
between parties belonging to these same corporations, etc., their custom
is the determining factor; but when it lies between them and others,
then it is to be dealt with according to the scriptures.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**सद्भिः** प्रतिषिद्धवर्जकैः, **धार्मिकैश्** च विहितार्थानुष्ठातृभिः । अथ वा **धार्मिकैः सद्भिः**, सच्छब्दः सत्तार्थो न पुनरुक्तसामर्थ्याद् । उभयविशेषणैर् ब्राह्मणैः । अथ वा **सद्भिर्** अध्ययनविज्ञानवद्भिः, **धार्मिकैश् च** शास्त्रार्थस्थैर् **यद् आचरितं स्यात्, तद् देशकुलजातीनां** वेदस्मृतिशास्त्राविरुद्धं **प्रकल्पयेत्** । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरं "शिष्ट्[आचारश् च शास्त्राविरुद्धं] प्रमाणम्" । न तु तद्विरोधि, शुकशारिकाभक्षणादि । एवं च यच् छिष्टैः कथंचित् कदाचित् चाचरितं गृह्यमाणार्थतया तद् राज्ञा निर्वर्त्यम् । अथ वा जातिजानपदादिधर्माणाम् उ[पदेशार्थो ऽयम् आर]म्भः । ते हि दृष्टार्था अपि सन्तः शास्त्राविरुद्धा एव राज्ञा कर्तव्याः । न तद्विरोधिनः । यतः "जातिजानपदं धर्मं" श्लोकशेष एवायम् । एवं चास्यापौनरुक्त्यं विज्ञेयम् ।

यत् त्व् आह **सद्भिर् आचरितं यत् स्याद्** इत्य् एतच् छ्लोकार्थम् । देशान्तरे **धार्मिकैः सद्भिर्** यद् आचर्यते **अविरुद्धं** श्रुत्या स्मृत्यन्तरेण वा तद् देशान्तरे ऽपि राजा [प्रकल्पयेत्, तद्देशस्थ्]आन् करायेत् (?) । तथा कुलैकदेशकालनियतम्, कर्णवेधादि यद् आचर्यते, तद् अपि कृत्स्ने कुले प्रकल्पयेत् । एवं विजातिनिमित्तो यो विवाहकाले ऽध्य्[आयादिः प्रवर्तितो भवति तम्] अपि सर्वस्यां जातौ प्रकल्पयेत् । राजावष्टम्भाच् चैषां धर्मानां प्रथनम् (?) अवस्थितिश् च यथा स्याद् इत्य् अवम् अर्थं राजधर्षूच्यते । कृतपरिभाषं व्यवहारदर्शनम् अधुना प्रस्तूयते ॥ ८.४६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

046	What may have been practised by the virtuous, by such twice-born men as are devoted to the law, that he shall establish as law, if it be not opposed to the (customs of) countries, families, and castes (gati).
</details>
