+++
title = "049 धर्मेण व्यवहारेण"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall make the advanced money repaid by means of (a) good faith, (b) tactful transaction, (c) trick, (d) moral pressure, and (c) force, the fifth.—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तत्र धर्मस्कन्धकरीत्या स्तोकं स्तोकं ग्रहणम् — "इदम् अद्य, इदं श्व, इदं परश्वः, यथा कुटुम्बसंवाहो ऽस्यैवं वयम् अपि तव कुऋउम्बभूताः संविभागयोग्याः" — इत्यादि पठितप्रयोगो **धर्मः** । यस् तु निःस्वः स **व्यवहारेण**[^१८९] दापयितव्यः । अन्यत्र कर्णोदकवद् धनं दत्वा कृषिवाणिज्यादिना व्यवहारयितव्यम् । तत्रोत्पन्नं धनं तस्माद् ग्रहीतव्यम् । यस् तु व्यवहारो राजनिवेद्यस् तस्य सर्वोपायपरिक्षये योज्यत्वाद् **बल**ग्रहणेन[^१९०] च गृहीतत्वात् । यस् तु साक्षान् न ददाति विद्यमानधनो ऽपि स **छलेन** दापयितव्यः । केनचिद् अपदेशेन विवाहोत्सवादिना कटकाद्याभरणं गृहीत्वा न दातव्यम्, यावद् अनेन तद् धनं न दत्तम् । **आचरितम्** अभोजनगृहद्वारोपवेशनादि । **बलं** राजाधिकरणोपस्थानम् । तत्र राजा साम्नाप्रयच्छन्तं निगृह्य च प्रपीड्य दापयतीति । न तु[^१९१] स्वगृहसंबन्धिधनादि बलम्, यतः "प्रकृतीनां बलं राजा" इति पठ्यते अस्मिन्न् एव प्रसङ्गे उशनसा । 


[^१९१]:
     M G: nanu


[^१९०]:
     M G: bāla-


[^१८९]:
     M G: niḥśvasavyavahāreṇa

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अन्ये</u> तु राज्ञ एवायम् उपदेश इति वर्णयन्ति, राजधर्मप्रकरणात् । राजा ज्ञापित उपायैर् एनं दापयेत् पराजितं स्वयं प्रतिपन्नं च । न तु सहसावष्टभ्य सर्वस्वं धनिने प्रतिपादनीयः । यत उभयानुग्रहो राज्ञा कर्तव्यः । सर्वस्वदाने चाधर्मणस्य कुटुम्बोत्सादः स्यात् सो ऽपि न युक्तः । उक्तं हि-

- नावसाद्य शनैर् दाप्यः काले काले यथोदयम् ।

- ब्राह्मणस् तु विशेषेण धार्मिके सति राजनि ॥ इति ।

तस्मात् किंचन वृद्ध्या संदापनीयः । कुटुम्बाद् अधिकधनसंभवे सर्वं दापनीयः । सर्वासंभवे च "कर्मणापि समं कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । अन्यस्मिन् व्याख्याने छलाचारौ राजानम् अज्ञापयित्वा न कार्यौ ॥ ८.४९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(*a*) ‘*Dharmeṇa*,’ ‘*by means of good faith*’;—*i.e*., receiving little
by little;—‘so much to-day, so much to-morrow, so much the day after
to-morrow;—just as it behoves him to maintain his family, so also is it
his duty to help me,—I also am a member of his family and as such a
sharer in his wealth,’—the use of such language constitutes ‘*good
faith*.’

(*b*) The man who has absolutely no property should be made to repay the
debt by ‘*tactful transaction*’; on the same principle on which, for the
purpose of drawing out water from the ear one puts more water into it,
the creditor should advance to the debtor more money, in order to enable
him to have recourse to agriculture or trade or some other means of
acquiring wealth, and then receive from him the wealth thus obtained.
The ‘*vyavahāra*’ that consists in filing a suit before the King is not
what is meant by the term as used hero; since one should have recourse
to this only when all other means have failed, and as such it is
included under ‘force.’

(*c*) When, even though possessed of the requisite wealth, the debtor
does not pay in a straight manner, he should be made to pay by means of
‘*trick*’; *i.e*., under some such pretext as that of a
marriage-ceremony or some such occasion, he should borrow from him a
bracelet or some such ornament, and not return it until the debt has
been cleared off.

(*d*) ‘*Moral pressure*’;—by giving up food and constantly sitting at
the man’s door and so forth.

(*e*) ‘*Force*’;—presenting one’self before the King’s court; where the
King shall have the man called quietly and by inflicting some punishment
make him pay up. The ‘*bala*’ of the text does not mean the creditor’s
strength in the shape of his relatives and wealth, etc.; because of the
maxim that the ‘force’ or ‘strength’ of the subject lies in the King,
which has been propounded in connection with the present context.

Others have explained the verse ṭo mean that by the means here
enumerated the *King* shall have the debt repaid;—and their reason for
saying so lies in the fact that it occurs in the context dealing with
the duties of the King. The sense of the verse thus is that ‘when the
amount claimed has been either admitted by the debtor or decreed by the
court, the King shall make him pay it up by these methods;—and he shall
not, all at once, have the entire property of the debtor handed over to
the creditor; since the kindly treatment of both parties constitutes the
King’s duty: and if the debtor’s entire property were handed over to the
creditor, his whole family would perish, and this would not be right. To
this end we have the declaration—‘Without absolutely ruining him, the
debtor should he made to pay little by little, according to his income,
specially so in the case of the Brāhmaṇa,—when the King is righteous.’
So that the man should be made to pay the principal along with a small
amount as interest; but in the event of the man possessing wealth more
than what is needed for the maintenance of his family, he should be made
to pay the entire amount of the claim; and if this be not possible, then
‘the debt shall be liquidated by service, etc.’ (8.177).

In the former explanation, the creditor shall not have recourse to
‘trick’ or ‘moral pressure,’ without notifying the same to the
King.—(49).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vyavahāreṇa*’.—‘By business-transaction: advancing more money to the
debtor with which, as capital, the latter would carry on some trade,
with the profits of which he would gradually clear off the older debt
also’ (Medhātithi);—‘by law-suit’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Narāyāṇa;
noted but rejected by Medhātithi);—‘by threatening a suit’
(Nandana);—‘by forced sale of property’ (Rāghavānanda).

Both Buhler and Hopkins represent Medhātithi as explaining this term to
mean ‘forced labour’. But there is nothing in Medhātithi to show this.
What Medhātithi means is quite clear, and it is made clearer by the
illustration given by him of ‘*karṇodaka*’; it is a common practice in
India that when water gets into the ear and cannot be easily got out,
people pour more water into it, and along with this latter, the former
water also flows out.

This verse is quoted in and *Aparārka* (p. 645), which adds the
following notes:—‘*dharma*:’ is ‘truth’,—‘*vyavahāra*’, stands for such
evidence as is documentary, oral and so forth,—‘*chala*’ is
*trick*,—‘*ācaritam*,’ ‘custom of the country’,—‘*balam*’ means
oppression by starving and so forth.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 67);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.40),
which adds the following notes:—‘*dharmeṇa*,’ *i.e*., ‘by truthful
persuasion’,—‘*vyavahāreṇa*’, *i.e*., ‘by adducing witnesses, documents
and other kinds of evidence’,—‘*chalena*’, *i.e*., borrowing from him
ornaments and other things under the pretext of some ceremonies &c. in
the family,—‘*ācaritena*’, *i.e*., by starving,—the fifth method being
the application of ‘*bala*’, force, in the shape of keeping him chained
and so forth;—by these methods is the creditor to recover the money that
he had advanced on interest.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 191);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 19a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (78b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (4.122).—(Same as Manu.)

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 67).—‘When the debtor is openly
arrested and brought before the assembly of men and kept there till he
pays—this, being in consonance with the custom of the country, is called
*Legal Proceedings*. By beating, by arresting, by work, by law-suit, and
first of all, by peaceful persuasion,—should the creditor obtain
repayment of his dues.’

*Nārada* (1.122).—‘By the mode consonant with religion, by legal
proceedings, by fraud, by customary mode, and fifthly, by force, a
creditor may recover what he has lent.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.54 *et seq*.).—‘When a debtor has admitted a debt, it
may he recovered from him by the expedients of friendly expostulation,
by moral suasion, by artful management, by compulsion and by confinement
in the house. When a debtor is caused to pay by the advice of friends
and kinsmen, by friendly remonstrances, by constant following, or by the
creditor starving himself, it is termed *Moral Suasion*. When a creditor
with a crafty design, borrows something from the debtor and withholds it
as a pledge, and thereby enforces payment of the debt, it is termed
*Artful Management*;—when the debtor is fettered and conducted to the
creditor’s house, where he is compelled by beating and other forcible
means, to pay the debt, it is called *Compulsion*;—when the debtor is
made to pay by confining his son, wife, or cattle, or by sitting at his
door, it is termed *Confinement in the* *House*.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**धर्मेण** साम्नानुद्वेजयन् शनैर् दापयेत्, शपथेन वा संप्रतिपत्तौ । तावद् एवम् अप्रतिपत्तौ व्यवहारेण वक्ष्यति; छलेन वानेकप्रकारेणापि विश्वास्य; आचरितेन वाभोजनगृहद्वारोपवेशनादिना लोकसमाचरितेन; बलेन वा स्वगृहबन्धनादिना मा भूद् अस्यार्थक्षयो राजसमावेशनेन । एवं च सत्य् अत्र नास्ति कश्चिद् धर्मातिक्रमो, यस्माद् अतः —
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

049	By moral suasion, by suit of law, by artful management, or by the customary proceeding, a creditor may recover property lent; and fifthly, by force.
</details>
