+++
title = "053 अदेश्यं यश्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who mentions the wrong place,—or who, having mentioned it, retracts,—or who does not understand that his previous and subsequent statements are contradictory;—(53)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तम् एवाधर्मर्णे ऽपह्नुवाने धनिना राजा ज्ञापयितव्यः- "ईदृशी च ज्ञापना कर्तव्या । अस्मिन् देशे ऽस्मिन् काल इदं धनम् इयद् वैतेन मत्सकाशाद् गृहीतम्" । स च पृष्टो भावयति- "नैतस्मिन् देशे ऽहम् अभवं यो ऽनेन च ग्रहणकाल उपदिष्टः" तद् अदेशं दिशति[^२१०] । अथ वा देशसाक्षिणो व्याख्यातास् तान् साक्षिणो देशकालाव् असंभवतो निर्दिशति । निर्दिश्य देशादिकम् अपजानीते "नैतन् मया निर्दिष्टम्" इति । **यश् चाधरोत्तरान् अर्थान्** पौरस्त्यानौपरिष्टांश् च **विगीतान्** विरुद्धान् अभिहितान् **नावबुध्यते** । यद् वा पूर्वं वक्तव्यं तत् परस्माद् वक्ति यत् परतस् तत् पूर्वं क्रमभेदं च वचनगतम् आत्मनो नानुसंधत्ते । "हीनः स इति निर्दिशेत्" (म्ध् ८.५७) इति सर्वत्र क्रियानुषङ्गो भविष्यतीति ॥ ८.५३ ॥


[^२१०]:
     M G J: tadā deśe diśyate (M G dīyate)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said before that on the debtor denying the debt, the
creditor complains to the King ,—*i e*., the complaint shall be lodged
in the form—‘At such and such place, at such and such time, such and
such an amount of money was borrowed from mo by this man’;—and on being
questioned, he may say ‘I was not at the place at the time,’ referring
to the place and time that have been alleged by him as those at which
the money was borrowed: and in this case he ‘mentions the wrong place.’
Or, the term ‘*deśa*’ may stand for the *witness*; and the text means
‘if he cites as witness a person whose presence at the time and place of
the transaction is impossible.’

Having alleged the place, time, etc., ‘*if he retracts*,’—saying ‘I did
not say this.’

He who does not understand that his ‘*previous statement*’—what he had
alleged before—and his ‘*subsequent statement*’—what he alleges
afterwards—are ‘*contradidory*’;—or if he does not realise the
discrepancy in his own behaviour.

‘*Such a person shall be declared to have failed*’—this verbal clause
(occurring in verse 57) has to be construed with each verse (from 53 to
57).—(53)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Medhātithi is again misrepresented by Buhler; he does not read
‘*apadeśyam*’, the reading adopted by him being ‘*adeśam*’. Nārāyaṇa
also reads the same, not ‘*apadeśyam*.’—Nandana reads ‘*adeyam*’, not
‘*apadeśyam*.’ Buhler has apparently confused verse 53 with 54, where
Medhātithi reads ‘*apadeśam*’ for ‘*apadeśyam*.’

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 108), which has
the following explanation—‘One who cites an impossible witness, or
having cited a possible one, says that he has not cited him, or one who
does not perceive inconsistencies in his own statement, is to be
non-suited;’—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 22b), which has the following
notes:—‘*Adeśam*’ (which is its reading for ‘*adeśyam*’), a place where
the parties have never met;—‘*adharottarān arthān*’, “former and
latter”—‘*vigītān*’, contradictory;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
p. 31b), which adds the following notes:—‘*Ādeśyām dishati*’, ‘says what
is irrelevant or indecorous,—he who having said something says he did
not say it’—‘who does not comprehend the inconsistencies in his own past
and present statements’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.16).—‘If one party tries to enforce his claim by
himself, though it has been disputed,—or if on being called, he runs
away, without saying anything, he should be non-suited and also fined.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 107).—‘If a party on being
directed to *speak out*, does not speak, he should be immediately
confined; and on the next day he should be declared to be *non-suited*.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 621).—‘If a party proceeds to enforce his claim
without applying to the King, he should be immediately punished and his
claim not allowed.’

*Nārada* (2.32-33).—‘One who takes to flight after haying received the
summons, one who remains silent, one who is convicted of untruth by the
deposition of witnesses, and one who makes a confession himself;—these
are the four kinds of persons *defeated*, *avasanna*. One who alters his
former statements, one who shuns judicial investigation, one who fails
to appear, one who makes no reply, one who absconds on receiving the
summons;—these are the five kinds of persons *non-suited*, *hīna*.’

*Nārada* (2.41).—‘A man convicted by his own confession, one defeated
through his own conduct, one whom the judicial investigation has proved
to be in the wrong,—these three deserve to have their final defeat
declared at the hands of judges.’

*Bṛhaspati* (5.5-6).—‘One who absconds after receiving the summons, one
who remains silent, one convicted by the deposition of witnesses, and
one who admits the correctness of the charge;—these are the four *losers
of the suit*. One who absconds loses the suit after three fortnights;
one who remains silent, after a week; one convicted by the deposition of
witnesses and one who has confessed, immediately.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 622).—‘After having declared his plaint, if he
renounces it and says something else, then, having taken up a different
position, he becomes non-suited. Having reduced his statement to
writing, if subsequently he says something more or less than that, he
becomes non-suited. After having preferred his claim, if he says *I did
not say this*, or if he contradicts his former statement, he also should
he declared to he non-suited. After having named his witnesses, if he,
of his own accord, does not bring them up for deposition, he should be
declared to be non-suited, after thirty days.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अदेशं** गृहीतुर् **यश् च दिशति अदेश्यं** वर्थवस्तु; **निर्दिश्यापह्नुते** **च यः** देशं देश्यं वा; यश् **चाधरोत्तरान् अर्थान्**, देशाद् अन्यान्य् अपि कालद्रव्यरूपसंख्यादीन् विगीतान् पूर्वोत्तरविरुद्धान् नावबुद्ध्यते, "हीनं तम् इति निर्दिशेत्" इति वक्ष्यत्य् अर्थिनम् इतरं वा ॥ ८.५३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

053	(The plaintiff) who calls a witness not present at the transaction, who retracts his statements, or does not perceive that his statements (are) confused or contradictory;
</details>
