+++
title = "056 ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—He who, on being ordered to speak, does not speak; or who does not prove what he has asserted;—or who does not grasp the previous and subsequent statements;—such a person fails in that suit.—(50)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तार्थ एव श्लोको ऽयं श्लोकान्तरैर् दृश्यते । पुनर्वचने च प्रयोजनम् उक्तम्- "बहुकृत्वो ऽपि पथ्यं वेदितव्यम्" इति । अक्षरार्थस् त्व् अर्थिना निःशेषिते पूर्वपक्षे प्रतिवादी "ब्रूह्य् अस्मिन् वस्तुनि" इति पृष्टो यदि न ब्रूयात्, पुनः पुनः पृच्छ्यमानो[^२१५] ऽपि । यो हि सम्यग् उत्तराभावान् मिथ्योत्तरवादित्वाद् अमुनैव मे पराजयो भवति तूष्णीभूतस्य तु मे संशय एव पराजये इत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या नोत्तरं ददाति, सो ऽपि जीयते । वक्ष्यति चात्र कालावच्छेदम् "न चेत् त्रिपक्षात् प्रब्रूयात्" (म्ध् ८.५८) इति । सद्यो ह्य् आकृष्टस्य पूर्वपक्षार्थानवबोधाद् उत्तराप्रतिपत्तेर् युक्तं कालहरणम् । अत्र च दिवसैः पञ्चभिर् दशभिर् द्वादशभिर् वा ईषद् ईषद् वदतस् त्रिपक्षसमाप्तिः, न त्व् इयन्तं कालं तूष्णीभाव एव । यश् चातो ऽधिकः कालः, "संस्थितो ऽपि कच्चित् संवत्सरं प्रतीक्षेताप्रतिभावायाम्[^२१६]" (ग्ध् १३.२८) इति, न युक्तम् आदर्तुं यतो ऽप्रतिभा[^२१७] यदि[^२१८] प्रतीक्षाकारणम् सा चेत्[^२१९] संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं भवतीति किम् इत्य् अकारणम् । न चैष नियमः केनचित् प्रकारेणावगम्यते[^२२०] ऽप्रतिभावतः[^२२१] संवत्सरेण प्रतिभा भवतीति । तस्मात् तावन्त्य् एवाहान्य् उपेक्षा युक्ता यावद्भिः पूर्वपक्षार्थावधारणं भवत्य् उत्तरं च प्रतिभाति । एतच् चामुकस्य मन्दधियो ऽप्य् एतावन् मात्रैर् अहोभिर् भवतीति नाधिकं कालम् उपेक्षणीयम् । 


[^२२१]:
     M G: pratibhānavataḥ; DK: 'pratibhānavataḥ


[^२२०]:
     M G: prakāreṇa navagamyate


[^२१९]:
     M G DK (1: 195) omit: cet


[^२१८]:
     M G DK omit: yadi


[^२१७]:
     MG: 'pratibhāve


[^२१६]:
     M G: -bhāvayed


[^२१५]:
     M G: pṛcchyamāne

- पूर्वपाक्षिकस्य तु तद् अहर् एव स्वार्थविनिवेशनं युक्तम् । यत इदम् एष मे धारयतीदं वानेन ममापकृतम् इति निश्चितं तस्य भवति । स्वेच्छया ह्य् असौ प्रवर्तते । केवलं तस्मै स्वपक्षम् आवेदयते किम् इत्य् अनिश्चितः स्वार्थो भवति । उत्तरपाक्षिकस् त्व् अविदितसंबन्धस् तदानीम् एव राजपुरुषैर् आनीयमानः कथम् इव स्वपरपक्षौ निश्चिनुयात् । पक्षद्वयनिरूपणं हि तद् अस्य तदानीम् एवापतति । नान्यथोत्तरपाक्षिको भवति । तस्मात् पूर्वपाक्षिकस्य साध्ये वस्तुनि तदहःपूर्वपक्षसमाप्तिर् द्विदिवसलाभो वा । उभाव् अपि चैतौ पक्षौ स्मृत्यन्तरपरिगृहीतौ । तथा ह्य् आह-

- सुनिश्चितबलाधानः पूर्वपक्षी भवेत् सदा ।

- दशाहं द्वादशाहं वा स्वपक्षं परिशोधयेत् ॥ इति ।

तथेदम् अपरम् "ततो ऽर्थी लेखयेत् सद्यः प्रतिज्ञातार्थसाधनम्" (य्ध् २.७) ।

- या तु संवत्सरपरीक्षा सा मूलासंभवाद् अप्रमाणम् । न हि व्यवहारस्मृताव् अष्टकादिवद् वेदमूलता शक्यते वक्तुम्, अकार्यरूपत्वाद् अर्थस्य । प्रमाणान्तरविषयत्वे च तदसंभवः प्रतिपादितः । 

- एषापि त्रिपक्षोपेक्षा न सर्वत्र । यत् उक्तम्-

- साहसस्तेयपारुष्यगोऽभिशापात्यये स्त्रियाम् ।

- विवादयेत् सद्य एव कालो ऽन्यत्रेच्छया स्मृतः ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.१२)

- साहसादौ हि चिरम् उपेक्ष्यमाणे ऽपरम् आराध्नुयात्[^२२२] । अतः सद्यो विवादो विधीयते । न चात्रास्मृत्यादयो[^२२३] ऽनुक्तहेतवः संभवन्ति । साहसादिकारणं हि तदानीम् एव राजानं वेदयेत् । तीव्रसंवेगता हि तत्र भवति । वस्त्राद्यपहारेण[^२२४] तदुपेक्षायां रागशङ्का[^२२५] भवति । साक्षिणस् तत्र यदृच्छया संनिहिता अपि भवन्ति । ते हि देशान्तरं गता नमजात्यादिभिर् न विज्ञायन्ते । ततः स्वाभाविकप्रमाणाभावः ।


[^२२५]:
     M G DK: nāśāśaṅkṣā


[^२२४]:
     M G DK: vastrādyupahāreṇa


[^२२३]:
     M G DK: cātra smṛtyādayo


[^२२२]:
     M G: aparādhnuyāt

- किं च ऋणादानादिषु कदाचिद् इतरेतरं संदधते । न तत्र राज्ञो हस्तप्रक्षेपः । प्रायेण[^२२६] च संशुद्धौ नानुस्मृतिर्[^२२७] उपयुज्यते तदा कियद् दत्तम् इति । साहसकारी तु राज्ञावश्यं निग्रहीतव्य इतरेण संधीयमानो ऽपि । तस्माद् ऋणादिषु कालहरणं साहसादिषु सद्य इति स्थितम् । तद् उक्तम्-


[^२२७]:
     M G DK: smṛtir


[^२२६]:
     M G DK: krameṇa

- गहनत्वाद् विवादानाम् असामर्थ्यात् स्मृतेर् अपि ।

- ऋणादिषु हरेत् कालं कामं तत्त्वबुभुत्सया ॥ (न्स्म् मा १.३८)

यदा संकुलः पूर्वपक्षो भवति तदा गहनत्वान् न शक्यते ग्रहीतुम् । अनाकुलो विलुप्तक्रमो ऽपि गृहीतः प्रतिवचनकाले महत्वान् न शक्यते सर्वेण स्मर्तुम् इति स्मृत्यन्तरस्यार्थः । 

**उक्तं च न विभावयेत्** । साध्यं वस्तु निर्दिश्य न साधयति साधनस्याभावात्, विपक्षे वा भावात् । **न च पूर्वापरं विद्यात्** । उक्तम् एतत् । **तस्माद्** **अर्थाद्** व्यवहारवस्तुनः **स हीयते** पराजितो भवतीत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is found to state what has been already mentioned in the
foregoing verses. The use of such repetitions has been already explained
on the ground that wholesome advice should be repeatedly driven home.

The meaning of the words of the text is as follows:—The plaint having
been filed and duly expounded by the complainant, when the defendant is
asked to make his statement regarding the matter of the plaint, if he
does not make a statement, even though repeatedly asked to do so;
*i.e*., he who, having no proper answer to make, does not give any
answer at all, thinking that if ho gave an unsuitable reply, his defeat
would be certain, whereas if he kept quiet, it would be doubtful, also
fails in his suit.

The time-limit in connection with the filing of the answer is going to
be laid down (under 58)—‘If he does not file the answer within *three
fortnights, etc*.’ When the man is suddenly dragged to the court, since
he does not know what the complaint against him is, he cannot find the
right answer at once, and hence it is only right to grant a
postponement, but when the law fixes the time-limit being fixed at
‘three fortnights,’ what is meant is that so many days are to be granted
to the defendant, who proceeds to file portions of his answer within
five, ten or twelve days,—and not that he is to keep absolute silence
for such a long time. As for the law that allows of more time,—*e.g*.,
in the text ‘In some cases he may wait for one year, when there is
non-understanding’ (*Gautama*, 13.28),—this should not be followed in
practice; because if ‘non-understanding’ is sufficient cause for delay,
why should it cease to be so after the lapse of one year only? Nor can
there be any certainty as to the man, who does not grasp the plaint
during one year, being able to grasp it after that time. Hence the
postponement granted should he just for that period of time which may he
regarded as a fair interval for the understanding of the suit and the
finding of the answer. So that no more time shall be granted than what
may be considered sufficient for a man of oven dull intelligence for the
said purpose.

As regards the plaintiff, it is only right that he should file his
plaint on the same day (that he presents himself before the Court); as
he already knows that ‘such and such a man owes me such an amount,’ or
that ‘such and such a man has done me this wrong’; and he takes action
also entirely upon his own choice. So that when the man is setting forth
his own case, why should he have a doubt upon any point (for the
clearing of which he should need time)?

As for the defendant, on the other hand, he does not know anything about
the complaint, when he is suddenly hauled up by the King’s officers; how
then can he have any definite notion regarding either the plaint or the
answer? He is in fact called upon to understand the plaint and find its
answer at the spur of the moment; otherwise he would not be a
‘defendant’ at all.

Thus then, for the Plaintiff, it is necessary to complete his plaint, in
regard to the case he has to prove, on the same day; or he may be
granted two or three days. Both these views have been accepted by other
*Smṛtis*:—*e.g*. (*a*) ‘The complaint should be always prepared with a
definite idea of the ease and its proofs,’ and again: ‘He may strengthen
his case for ten or twelve days’; and (*b*) ‘The plaintiff shall
immediately set forth his case in writing’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
7).

As for the view that ‘postponement may be granted for one year,’ there
is no authority for it, and as such it cannot be accepted. We cannot
always assume the presence of Vedic texts corroborative of such
Smṛti-texts as bear upon judicial proceedings,—in the same manner as we
do in the case of the *Smṛti* texts dealing with the *Aṣṭakā* -offering;
because the judicial proceeding is not of the nature of an *act* to be
done. In fact, we have already shown that such assumption is not
possible in the case of matters amenable to other moans of knowledge
(than verbal authority).

This postponement of the complaint is not to be granted in all cases;
since it has been laid down that—‘In the case of heinous crimes, of
theft, of assault, of charges in connection with cows, of wrong done to
the life and property of women, the defendant should be made to answer
the charge at once; in other cases the time has been declared to be
allowable according to the wish of the Court’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
12). In the case of heinous crimes and the rest, if a long postponement
were granted, then, during the interval, the defendant might propitiate
the other party. It is for this reason that *immediate answer* has been
required. Specially as in such cases, there can be no lapse of memory or
other causes that would justify the postponement of the answer; because
as a rule charges of heinous crimes are laid before the King
immediately, for the simple reason that in such oases there is great
urgency. For instance, in the case of the theft of clothes, there is
always the chance of its former colour being altered during the
interval. Then again, in such cases such witnesses as may have happened
to be present by chance would he immediately available, while (if
postponement were granted) they would have gone to other places, and, as
their name and caste, etc., would not he known, they could not be traced
and found. So that there would naturally be absence of requisite proof.

Further, in the case of non-payment of debt and other matters, the
parties may settle it between themselves, in which the King cannot
interfere; for when the case has been amicably settled, it is no
business of the King’s to enquire how much of the claim has been paid.
As for the criminal, on the other hand, it is the duty of the King to
punish him, even though he may have come to terms with the plaintiff.
For these reasons, the conclusion is that there shall he postponement
only in the case of non-payment of debt and such cases, while in the
case of crime, etc., immediate answer shall be demanded. To this end wo
have the following declaration—‘In the case of non-payment of debt,
etc., postponement may he granted, for the purpose of finding out the
truth, as disputes on such matters are intricate, and there is
possibility of the defendant being incapable of supplying the answer at
once, or of his having forgotten the facts of the case’;—and the meaning
of this *Smṛti* text is that in a case, where the plaint happens to be
an intricate one, it is only natural that being so intricate, it cannot
he grasped Jut the spur of the moment,—and every one cannot remember,
after the lapse of a long time, all the details clearly and in the
correct order, in order to be able to offor a suitable answer.

‘*And does not prove what he has asserted*,’—*i.e*., having put forward
the case he has to prove, he fails to establish it, because he has no
proofs, and not because he has no opponent (against whom he would have
to establish it).

‘*Who does not grasp the precious and subsequent statements*’;—this has
been already explained (under 53).

For the said reasons, the person fails in the matter of the suit;
*i.e*., is defeated.—(56)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pūrvāparam*’—‘The plaint and its answer’ (Medhātithi);—‘the proof and
the matter to be proved’ (Kullūka);—‘what should be said first and what
afterwards’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (22b) which says that
‘*brūhi*’, ‘speak out’ has to he reiterated for the sake of
firmness;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 31b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.53].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश् च न ब्रूयात्** प्रतिपादनकाले पराभव[भीत्या नोत्तरं ददाति । **उक्तं च न वि**]**भावयेत्** साक्षिभिः, अभावाद् वा तेषां विवक्षासम्यग्दर्शनाद् वा । **न च पूर्वापरं विद्यात्**- साक्षिगतम् अन्यत्र व्यवहारगतम् उक्तम् एव । **तस्माद् अर्थात् स हीयते** ॥ ८.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

056	Or who, being ordered to speak, does not answer, or does not prove what he has alleged; or who does not know what is the first (point), and what the second, fails in his suit.
</details>
