+++
title = "064 नाऽर्थसम्बन्धिनो नाप्ता"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither interested persons, nor relations, nor helpers, nor enemies, nor persons of proved corruption, nor those afflicted with disease, nor the corrupted should be made witnesses.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तानीमानि संभाव्यमानमिथ्याभिधानकरणत्वेन पठ्यन्ते । तत्र **अर्थसंबन्धिन** उत्तमर्णाधमर्णाद्याः । उत्तमर्णा ह्य् अधमर्णवचनेन पराजीयमानास् तदानीम् एव रोषावेशवशितः[^२५३] स्तम्भयन्ति धनं प्रयादतुम् अधमर्णम् । अतो ऽसौ[^२५४] संनिहितधनिकचित्तम् अनुवर्तमानः तदनुगुणं वक्तुं शक्नोति[^२५५] । तस्माद् असौ न साक्षी । उत्तमर्णो ऽपि निर्धने ऽधमर्णे व्यवहारजयाच् च धनप्राप्तौ मह्यम् अयं प्रतिदास्यतीत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या कदाचित् तत्पक्षानुगुणं वक्तीति सो ऽप्य् असाक्षी ।


[^२५५]:
     M G DK (1:254): saṃnihitadhanatvāc cittam anuvartamānaḥ śakyate


[^२५४]:
     M G: 'tau


[^२५३]:
     M G: -vaśitāḥ

अथ वार्थः प्रयोजनं यस्य साक्षिणो विवादिभ्यां किंचित् प्रयोजनं साध्यम्, तेन वा तयोः, स उपकारगन्धान् न साक्षी । यो वा व्यवहारगतेनार्थेन समानफलः । इत्य् एवंप्रकार्**आर्थसंबन्धिनः** ।   

**आप्ता** मित्रबान्धवतया[^२५६] कार्याभ्यन्तराः पितृव्यमातुलादयः । **सहायाः** प्रतिभूप्रभृतयो । **वैरिणः** प्रसिद्धाः । **दृष्टदोषा** अन्यत्र कृतकौटसाक्ष्याः । अन्यद् वा प्रतिषिद्धम् आचरितवन्तः । **व्याध्यार्ता** रोगपीडिताः । न पुनर् ईषद्रोगिण इत्य् आर्तग्रहणम् । पीडितस्य हि क्रोधविस्मृत्यादयो मिथ्यावचने संभाव्यन्ते । **दूषिताः** पातकिनो ऽभ्यस्तोपपातकाश् च । **दृष्टदोष**ग्रहणं तु तेषाम् एव कृतनिग्रहाणां परिग्रहार्थम् । ते हि राजभिर् धृतदण्डग्राहितविनयत्वान्[^२५७] न संप्रति दूषीता भवन्ति ॥ ८.६४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The following persons are named, as showing those persons in whose case
causes for telling lies are likely to be present.

Among these are (1) ‘*interested persons*’ —*i.e*., persons standing
related to each other in the relation of the creditor, the debtor and so
forth. If a person loses a ease through the deposition of one who
happens to be his debtor, he is likely to become enraged at that very
time and to press the debtor for immediate repayment of the debt; in
view of this the debtor is likely to be swayed by a desire to keep the
creditor pleased; and as such he cannot he a witness. Similarly, in a
suit filed by the debtor against some one, his creditor would be swayed
by the consideration that if the penniless suitor won his case, he would
he able to repay his own dues; and as such he would he likely to depose
falsely in his favour; for this reason he also cannot be a true witness.

Or, ‘*interest*’ mean *purpose, object*; thus persons who have some end
in view,—who stand to gain from either party,—or from whom either party
is likely to gain something—are called ‘*interested*’—their interest in
the case being similar to that of the parties themselves.

‘*Relations*’—friends and relations knowing the insand outs of the
case,—*e.g*., paternal and maternal uncles, etc.

‘*Helpers*’—those who have stood security and others similarly situated.

‘*Enemies*’—what these are is well known.

‘*Persons of proved corruption*,’—those who have home false evidence in
other cases, or who have committed other forbidden acts.

‘*Afflicted with disease*,’—*i.e*., those affected by serious,—not
paltry-ailments; this is what is implied by the term ‘*afflicted*.’
Those labouring under such afflictions are likely to lose temper, to
forget things and to perjure themselves.

‘*Corrupted*,’— those who have committed a mortal sin, or have
repeatedly committed minor sins. the term ‘*of proved corruption*’ is
meant to refer to those who hare been convicted of, and punished for, a
serious crime. Such persons are no longer regarded as ‘*corrupted*,’
because they have been brought under discipline by having paid to t he
king the penalty for their sin.—(64)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Arthasambandhinaḥ*’—‘Persons having money-dealings with either of the
two parties’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘having an interest in the suit’ (Nārāyaṇa and
Medhātithi, alternatively); ‘who have received benefits from the
parties’ (Nandana).

‘*Sahāyāḥ*’—‘Sureties and the like’ (Medhātithi);—‘Servants’ (Kullūka
and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 66);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 281);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p.
10a);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (29b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
49a), which says that these texts set forth those qualities, which make
a man unreliable as a witness, and it reproduces Medhātithi’s
explanations of the words.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

*Gautama* (13.2).—(See under 63.)

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—(See under 63.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.28).—(See under 63.)

*Viṣṇu* (8.2-4).—‘The King cannot be made a witness; nor an ascetic, nor
a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor a gamester, nor a thief, nor a person who is not
his own master, nor a woman, nor a child, nor a perpetrator of violence,
nor one overaged, nor one intoxicated or insane, nor a man of
ill-repute, nor an outcast, nor one tormented by hunger or thirst, nor
one oppressed by a sudden calamity, nor one wholly absorbed in evil
passions;—nor an enemy or a friend, nor one interested in the
subject-matter, nor one who does forbidden acts; nor one formerly
perjured; nor an attendant; nor one who, without being appointed, comes
and offers his evidence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.70-71).—‘The following are not to be made
witnesses:—Woman, child, aged person, gamester, one intoxicated or
insane, one accused of a heinous crime, actor, heretic, forger, one with
defective organs, outcast, a near relative, or one related in business,
friend, enemy, thief, one addicted to violence, those beset with
perceptible faults, one despised (by good men).’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.13).—(See under 62.)

*Nārada* (1.157-162).—‘Incompetent witnesses have been declared by the
learned to be of five sorts: (1) Actually declared by law to be
incompetent, (2) incompetent on account of depravity, (3) incompetent by
reason of contradiction, (4) one of uncalled for deposition, (5) one of
intervening decease. (1) Learned Brāhmaṇas, devotees, aged persons and
ascetics are those who have been declared by law to be incompetent,
without any reason being given for it;—(2) thieves, robbers, dangerous
characters, gamblers and assassins are incompetent by reason of their
depravity, there is no truth to be found in them;—(3) if the statements
of witnesses called by the King do not agree, they are rendered
incompetent by reason of contradiction,—(4) he who, without being
appointed to be a witness, comes of his own accord to make a deposition,
is called a *spy* in the law-books and he is unworthy to bear
testimony;—(5) where can any person bear testimony, if the claimant is
no longer in existence, whose claim should have been heard? Such a
person is rendered incompetent by reason of intervening decease.’

*Nārada* (1.177-192).—‘Those must not be examined as witnesses who are
interested in the suit; nor friends or associates or enemies or
notorious offenders or persons stained with a heavy sin;—nor a slave or
an impostor, or one not admitted to Śrāddhas; nor a child, nor an
oil-presser, nor one intoxicated, nor a mad man, nor a careless man, nor
one distressed, nor a gamester, nor one who sacrifices for the whole
village;—nor one engaged in a long journey, nor a merchant who travels
to transmarine countries, nor a religious ascetic, nor one sick or
deformed; nor a simple man, nor a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor one who neglects
religious practices, nor a eunuch nor an actor;—nor an atheist, nor an
apostate, nor one who has forsaken his wife or his fire, nor one who
makes illicit offerings, nor an associate who eats out of the same dish
as oneself, nor an adversary, nor a spy, nor a relation, nor one related
by the same womb;—nor one who has proved an evil-doer, nor a public
dancer, nor one who lives by poison, nor a snake-catcher, nor a
poisoner, nor an incendiary, nor one who has committed a minor
offence;—nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor a ferocious man, nor one who
has relinquished worldly appetites, nor one penniless, nor a member of
the lowest castes, nor one leading a bad life, nor one still a student,
nor an oilman nor a dealer in roots;—nor one obsessed by a demon, nor an
enemy of the King, nor a weather-prophet, nor an astrologer, nor a
malicious person, nor one self-sold, nor one of deficient limbs, nor one
living by prostitution;—nor one with bad nails or black teeth, nor one
who betrays his friend, nor a rogue, nor a dealer in spirituous liquor,
nor a juggler, nor an avaricious or cruel man, nor an enemy of the
company of traders or of an association;—nor one who takes animal-life,
nor a leather-manufacturer, or a cripple, or an outcast, or a forger, or
a quack, or an apostate, or a robber, or one of the King’s
attendants;—nor a Brāhmaṇa who sells human beings, cattle meat, bones,
honey, milk, water or butter; nor a member of a twice-born caste who is
addicted to usury;—nor one who neglects his duties, nor a judge, nor a
bard, nor one who serves low people, nor one who quarrels with his
father, nor one who causes dissension. These are the incompetent
witnesses. When a heinous crime, or a robbery or adultery or defamation
has been committed, the King should not inquire too strictly into the
character of the witnesses. A child also cannot be made a witness; nor a
woman, nor one man alone, nor a cheat, nor a relation, nor an enemy. By
the consent of both parties even one man alone may become a witness in a
suit.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.29-30).—‘The mother’s father, the father’s brother, the
wife’s brother, maternal uncle, brother, friend and son-in-law are
inadmissible as witnesses in all disputes. Persons addicted to adultery
or to drinking, gamblers, calumniators, insane, suitering, violent
persons and unbelievers cannot act as witnesses.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **नार्थसंबन्धिनो नाप्ता न सहाया न वैरिणः ।**  
> **न दृष्टदोषाः कर्तव्याह्**

अन्यस्मिन् व्यवहारे कूटसाक्षित्वेन

> **न व्याध्यार्ता न दूषिताः  ॥ ८.६४ ॥**

ते हि स्मृतिप्रमाणाद् उभयत्र न स्युः । निमित्तेन च प्रतिषेधाद् अनार्तो व्याधितो ऽपि स्यात् । पातकोपपातकाभिशंसा दूषितो ऽपि न स्यात् ॥ ८.६४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

064	Those must not be made (witnesses) who have an interest in the suit, nor familiar (friends), companions, and enemies (of the parties), nor (men) formerly convicted (of perjury), nor (persons) suffering under (severe) illness, nor (those) tainted (by mortal sin).
</details>
