+++
title = "070 स्त्रियाप्य् असम्भावे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the event of (proper witnesses) not forthcoming, evidence may be given by a woman, by a minor, by an aged person, by a pupil, by a relative, by a slave, or by a servant.—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्त्रियेति** लिङ्गव्यत्यय उक्तः । **बालेन स्थविरेण वेति** वयोव्यत्ययः । **शिष्येणे**त्यादिना संबन्धिनः प्रतिप्रसवः । एतच् च प्रदर्शनम् एवंविधानां नियमानां व्यभिचाराय । तेन जातिसादृश्ये[^२७०] ऽपि नाद्रियेते । सुहृद्वैरिदृष्टदोषादयस् तु नेष्यन्ते । येषां किंचिद् असत्याभिधानकरणत्वं दृष्टं नापि व्यापकं[^२७१] ते न प्रतिसूयन्ते । येषां तु बहुव्यापकं क्वचिद् एव गुणातिशयं चेति व्यभिचरेत् ततः क्वचिद् एव तत्साक्षिणः । उक्तं च ।


[^२७१]:
     M G DK: nātivyāpakaṃ


[^२७०]:
     M G DK (1.259): jñātisādṛśye

- एकः सहस्राल् लभ्येत न सौहार्दान् न शात्रवात् ।

- नार्थसंबन्धतो वापि पुरुषो ऽनृतम् आचरेत् ॥ इति ।

- असंभवे ऽन्येषां साक्षिणां स्त्रियापि कार्यम् । किम् । साक्ष्यम् इति पूर्वश्लोकाद् अनुषज्यते । **शिष्येणेति** मौखस्रौवसंबन्धप्रदर्शनार्थम्[^२७२] एतत् । **बन्धुनेति** अहार्योत्पत्तिकायौनसंबन्धप्रतिप्रसवः[^२७३] । सत्य् अपि संबन्धत्वे यो नातिप्रत्यासन्नः स गृह्यते । तेन भ्रातृव्यमातुलश्वशुर्यादयो न साक्षिणः । तथाविधे हि बन्धुशब्दो रूढः । **दासेनेति** स्वस्वामिसंबन्ध उपलक्ष्यते । न स्वाम्य् उपाध्यायो याजकश् च सर्वंविधे विषये साक्षिणः । **दासो** गर्भदासः । **भृतको** वैतनिकः[^२७४] । 


[^२७४]:
     M G: vaitānikaḥ


[^२७३]:
     M G: ahāryotpattikāyānasaṃbandha-; J: ahāryotpattikāyādisaṃbandha-


[^२७२]:
     J: maukhaśrauta-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> चासामर्थ्याद् बालादयः साक्षित्वे निरस्ताः । न ह्य् एते साक्ष्यम् अवधारयितुं शक्नुवन्ति बुद्धेर् अस्थैर्यात् परिपाकादिभिर् दोषैस् तद् आपदि प्रतिप्रसूयमानसमञ्जसम् इति, न ह्य् आपदि शक्तिर् अस्याविर्भवति । यो हि ब्रूयात् "न वा[^२७५] नवौदनः पक्तव्यः; सत्य् अग्नौ तु पक्तव्यः" इति तादृग् एतत् स्यात् । 


[^२७५]:
     M G DK: tena vā

<u>नैष दोषः</u> । एवम् अर्थम् एवोत्तरश्लोक आरभ्यते ॥ ८.७० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mention of ‘*woman*’ thus permits departure from the rule laying
down the sex of the witness; that of ‘*minor*’ and ‘*aged person*’ that
prescribing his age; and that of ‘*pupil*’ makes an exception in favour
of relations in general;—this being mentioned only by way of
illustration, indicating the admissibility of persons similarly
circumstanced; hence the restrictions regarding caste or position also
are not to be strictly observed. But dear friends, or enemies or persons
of proved dishonesty.are not admissible in any case; nor any one in whom
there is suspicion of the presence of motives for telling a lie, or
those who have been found to be unreliable. Those however who have been
found to be only slightly unreliable, but otherwise endowed with
superior qualifications, may, in some cases, serve as witnesses. On this
point we have the following assertion—‘There may be one man among a
thousand who would not tell a lie, under the influence of friendship or
enmity or some other interested motive.’

In the event of other witnesses not forthcoming, *even a woman* ‘*may
give evidence*,’—this clause being construed from the preceding verse.

‘*Pupil*’—indicates tutorial and sacerdotal relationship in general.

‘*Relative*’—this term makes an exception in favour of what cannot be
avoided; the sense being that even though the man may bear some
relationship to the parties, if he is not very nearly related, he may be
admitted. Hence the cousin, the uncle, the brother-in-law and such other
near relatives should not he made witnesses, the name ‘relative’ being,
in ordinary usage, applicable to these persons.

‘*Slave*’—indicates the relation of *ownership* in general; that is why
the master, the teacher and the priest are not to be made witnesses in
any kind of suit. The term ‘*slave*’ stands for the born slave and
‘*servant*’ for one who serves on wages.

“The minor and others have been excluded on the ground of
incapacity,—they are incapable of realising what is *evidence*, because
of their mind being fickle and undeveloped; so that any exception in
their favour, oven in connection with emergencies, cannot he right. For
certainly even in an emergency they do not acquire the right capacity.
In fact, such an exception would he similar to the case where a man
having said ‘fresh rice shall not he cooked,’ adds ‘but if there is no
fire it shall be cooked?’

There is no force in this objection; as it is in view of these
considerations that we have the next verse.—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule refers to the cases contemplated in the preceding verse
(Govindarāja and Kullūka),—‘to the last of these cases only’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 671), which adds that the women
and others mentioned here to be admissible as witnesses should be
understood to be only such as are free from the disqualifications of
being prejudiced or wickedly inclined and so forth.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 214);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 70);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 181);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (32a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.70-72)**

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘In cases of disobedience of the
royal edict, of adultery, of violent crimes, of theft and of
assaults,—one should not be particular regarding the admissibility of
witnesses. In the case of occurrences within a house, or at night, or
outside the village, if a suit is brought forward, the King shall not be
very particular regarding the admissibility of witnesses.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘A slave, a blind man, a deaf man,
women, children, very aged persons and others,—if they are not connected
with the parties—may he witnesses in the case of crimes of violence. All
those persons who have been declared to he incompetent witnesses may he
admitted as witnesses according to the gravity of the case. But even so
a child, or a single person, or a woman, or forger, or a relative or an
enemy should not be admitted; as they would he found to depose falsely;
the child would do it through ignorance, the woman through inherent
untruthfulness, the forger by reason of his being a habitual wrong-doer,
the relations through their affection, and the enemy as a means of
revenge.’

*Gautama* (13.9).—‘There can be no objection against any witness in a
case of criminal hurt.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.6).—‘In cases of theft, of violence, abuse and assault, and
of adultery, the competence of witnesses should not be examined too
strictly.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.72).—‘All persons may be witnesses in cases of
adultery, of theft, of assault and of violent crimes.’

*Nārada* (1.189).—‘In cases of heinous crime, or robbery, or adultery,
or one of the two kinds of assault, he should not enquire too strictly
into the character of the witnesses.’

*Nārada* (1.188).—‘Slaves, impostors and other incompetent witnesses
enunciated shall nevertheless be witnesses in suits of especially grave
character.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सादृश्यापवादार्थः एवं च सति यथा स्त्र्यादीनां सादृश्याभावे ऽप्य् असदृशा एव क्वचिद् भवन्ति, एवं बालादीनाम् अपि क्वचिद् विवादे साक्षित्वं विज्ञेयं प्रतिषिद्धानाम् अपि सताम् । उक्तेभ्यश् च बालादिभ्यो ऽत्र श्लोके ये ऽप्य् अनुक्ताः प्रतिषिद्धाश् च तेषाम् अपि प्रतिप्रसवो निर्देशनार्थत्वाद् बालानां विज्ञेयः । ननु च कारणतः प्रतिषिद्धानां बालादीनां साक्षित्वे पुनस् तेषाम् उपदेशो न न्याय्यः । प्रतिषेधकारणस्यावस्थितत्वाद् इति ॥ ८.७० ॥

_यत् इदम् अनुमानं तद् विशुद्ध्यर्थम् आह-_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

070	On failure (of qualified witnesses, evidence) may given (in such cases) by a woman, by an infant, by an aged man, by a pupil, by a relative, by a slave, or by a hired servant.
</details>
