+++
title = "079 सभान्तः साक्षिणः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The investigating Judge shall question the witnesses assembled in the court, in the presence of the plaintiff and the defendant, gently exhorting them in the following manner.—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सभायाम् अन्तः **सभान्तः** । शौण्डादित्वात् समासः (च्ड़्। पाण् २.१.४०) । व्यवहारदेशगता उभयोर् **अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोः** संनिधाने ऽनुयोक्तव्या वक्ष्यमाणेन विधिना । **सान्त्वयन्** अपरुषं ब्रुवन्[^२९५] । पारुष्येण हि प्राड्विवाकाद् बिभ्यतो ऽप्रकृतिस्था न[^२९६] सर्वं स्मरेयुः, संस्कारभ्रंशहेतुत्वाद् भयस्य । प्राड्विवाको राज्ञा व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकृतो रूढ्योच्यते । यद्य् अप्य् अवयवार्थो राजन्य् अपि संभवति। पृच्छति विविनक्तीति, तथापि[^२९७] भेदेन प्रयोगदर्शनम्- "अमात्यः प्राड्विवाको वा यः कुर्यात् कार्यम् अन्यथा" (म्ध् ९.२३४) इति । पृच्छतीति प्राट्, "क्विब्वचिप्रच्छिश्रिद्रुश्रुप्रुवां दीर्घो ऽसंप्रसारणं च" इति प्राट् । विशेषेण धर्मसंकटेषु विवेक्तीति विवाटः । "कृत्यल्युटो बहुलम्" (पाण् ३.३.११३) इति । कर्तरि घञ् । "चजोः कु घिण्ण्यतोः" (पाण् ७.३.५२) इति कुत्वम् । प्राट् चासौ विवाकश् च प्राड्विवाकः ॥ ८.७९ ॥


[^२९७]:
     M G: tathā ca


[^२९६]:
     M G: 'prakṛtisthānaṃ 


[^२९५]:
     M G omit: bruvan
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In the court*’—inside the court room; the compounding being in
accordance with Pāṇini 2. 1.40;—those who have presented themselves at
the place of the trial; should he questioned ‘*in* *the presence of the
plaintiff and the defendant*’—both;—they being ‘*gently exhorted*’ in
the manner described below,—not addressed harshly; because if addressed
harshly, they would become frightened of the judge, and thereby losing
the normal condition of their mind, they would he unable to recall all
the details of the case; because fright always deprives people of their
memory.

‘*Prāḍvivāka*’ Investigating ‘*Judge*’ is the name given to the officer
appointed by the king to try cases. Though the name, in its literal
significance of ‘questioning and judging’ applies to the king also, yet
we find the two names used separately, in such texts as—‘If the Minister
or the *Judge* (Prāḍvivāka) should pervert the details of a suit, the
*king* himself shall look into it, etc.’ (*Manu*. 9.234.)

In the term ‘*prāḍvivāka*,’ ‘*prāṭ*’ means *one who questions*,
‘*pṛchati*;’ it being derived from the root ‘*prach*’ to ‘question’ with
the nominative affix ‘*kvip*’; the elongation of the vowel and the
change into ‘ṭ’ being analogous to the case of the roots ‘*vaci*,’
‘*śri*,’ ‘*dru*’ ‘*śru*,’ ‘*pru*.’ ‘*Prāṭ*’ is the qualifying epithet to
‘*vivāka*,’ which means ‘one who judges or investigates knotty legal
cases’;—the nominative affix ‘*ghañ*’ being added in accordance with
*Pāṇini* 3. 3. 113, and the change of ‘*ca*’ into ‘*ka*’ being in
accordance with ‘*Pāṇini*’ 7.3.52. the term *prāḍvivāka* thus means the
*questioning or Investigating Judge*.—(79)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted *in Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 75) in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 18);—in

*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 198);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b),
which explains ‘*sabhāntaḥ*’ as ‘in court’, and ‘*anuyuñjīta*’ as
‘should question.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

*Śukranīti* (4.5.398-414).—‘The witness should be interrogated, after
being well-governed by oaths, teachings of Purāṇas, narration of great
merits of virtue and the great sins of falsehood:—“Where, when, how,
whence and what have you seen or heard,—whether written by the man
himself or caused to be written by somebody,—speak truly all that you
know.” The witness who gives true evidence attains happy life hereafter
and unrivalled fame in this world—this is the remark of Brahmā, etc.’
(the rest as in Manu 83-85).

*Nārada* (1.198 and 200).—‘After having summoned all the witnesses and
hound them down firmly by an oath, the Judge shall examine them
separately. They should be men of tried integrity and conversant with
the circumstances of the case. By sacred texts extolling the excellence
of truth and denouncing the sinfulness of falsehood, let him inspire
them with deep awe, as follows—(Verses 201 to 228—201, 208, 209 being
the same as Manu 93, 98, 99 respectively)’.—\[All this is to be
addressed to all witnesses; Manu reserves 89 to 101 for *Śūdra*
witnesses only.\]

*Gautama* (13.5).—‘Witnesses shall not speak singly, or without being
asked.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘A person who is possessed of good qualities may
be called as witness and shall answer the questions put to him,
according to the truth...... after having been exhorted to be fair to
both sides.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.24 *et seq*.).—‘Let him exhort the witnesses with the
following speeches—“Whatever places of torture await the killer of a
Brāhmaṇa and other great criminals... those places of abode are ordained
for a witness who gives false evidence; and the fruit of every virtuous
act he has done, from the day of his birth to his dying day, shall he
lost to him. Truth makes the sun spread his rays; Truth makes the moon
shine; Truth makes the wind blow; Truth makes the earth bear all things;
Truth makes waters flow; Truth makes the fire burn. The atmosphere
exists through truth; so do the gods; and so do the offerings. If
veracity and a thousand horse-sacrifices are weighed against each other,
truth ranks even higher than a thousand horse-sacrifices. Those who,
acquainted with the facts, and appointed to give evidence, stand mute,
are equally criminal with, and deserve the same severe punishment as,
false witnesses.” After having addressed him thus, let the King examine
the witnesses in the order of their castes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.73-75).—‘He shall address the following words to the
witnesses standing near the plaintiff and defendant—“He who hears false
witness goes to those regions which are reserved for people committing
heinous offences, and other crimes, for incendiaries, for murderers of
women and children. Whatever virtuous act you may have done during a
hundred lives, understand that all that will go to the party whom, by
your false evidence, you make lose the suit.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.9 *et seq*.).—‘The wise man should address an
appointed witness in the following manner:—“Whatever merit thou hast
acquired, etc., etc.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.32-34).—‘Depose, O witness, according to the truth;
expecting thy answers, thy ancestors hang in suspense, as to whether
they shall rise or fall, etc., etc.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अधुना साक्षिणां सत्यवचनार्थो योगो ऽत ऊर्ध्वं वर्तिष्यते । प्राङ्विवाको ब्राह्मणो राजाधिकृतो विडान् न राजा सामर्थ्यात् । तथा च वक्ष्यति "अमात्यः प्राड्विवाको वा यत् कुर्युः कार्यं अन्यथा" इति । "क्विब्वचिप्रच्छ्यायतस्तुकटप्रुजुश्रीणां दीर्घो ऽप्रसारणं च" इत्य् अनेन । पृच्छतीति प्राट्, पृष्ट्वा विषेषेण धर्मसंकटेषु विशिष्टं वा वक्ष्यति विवाकः, प्राट् चासौ विवाकश् चेति प्राड्विवाकः । पृच्छति चासौ विविनक्ति चेति यावत् एष प्राड्विवाको धर्मज्ञो ब्राह्मणः । साक्षिणो ऽनुयुञ्जीत विधिनानेन वक्ष्यमाणेन संत्वयन्न् अपारुषम् । किं कारणम्, प्रकृतिस्थो यथा सत्यं ब्रूयात् साक्षी ॥ ८.७९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

079	The witnesses being assembled in the court in the presence of the plaintiff and of the defendant, let the judge examine them, kindly exhorting them in the following manner:
</details>
