+++
title = "105 वाग्-गैवत्यैश् च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

They should offer sacrifices to Sarasvati with half-boiled rice dedicated to the speech-goddess,—doing the best expiation for the sin of untruthfulness.—(105)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वाक् चासौ देवता च सा वाग्देवता । तदर्थं च चरवो **वाग्दैवत्याः** । तण्डुला नातिपक्वाश् **चरवः** । तैर् **यजेरन्न्** इति बहवचननिर्देशात्, **चरुभिर्** इति बहुवचनम् । न पुनर् एकैकशो बहवश् चरवो नापि संहतानां व्रात्यस्तोमवद् यागो "देवश् चेद् वर्षेद् बहवो ब्राह्मणा यजेरन्" (प्म्स् १०.६.४५) इति, तद् बहुवचनम् । न तु[^५१] कपिञ्जलैश् च त्रिभिर् यजेरन्न् इतिवत्[^५२] ।


[^५२]:
     M G DK (1: 275) omit: itivat


[^५१]:
     M G: nanu

- तद् एतद् ब्राह्मणाद्यनुग्रहार्थम् अनृतम् उक्तं भवति । **अनृतम् एवैनः** पापम् असत्याभिधानलक्षणा क्रिया । यथा धर्मक्रियावत एवं समानाधिकरणे षष्ठी । येषां तु क्रियाजन्यौ धर्माधर्मौ न क्रियैव, तन्मते ऽनृतस्य यद् एन इति वैय्यधिकरण्ये[^५३] ऽनृतनिमित्तत्वाद् एनो ऽनृतम्, उपचारतः समानाधिकरणे एव । तस्य **निष्कृतिः** शोधनं पावनं प्रायश्चित्तम् इति यावत् । **परा** प्रकृष्टा ।


[^५३]:
     DK: -karaṇyena

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> च कुतो ऽत्र पापम्, यावतास्मिन् निमित्ते "नानृतवचने दोषः" (ग्ध् १३.२४) इत्य् उक्तम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">केचिद्</u> आहुः "निवृत्तिस् तु महाफला" (म्ध् ५.५६) इति । अस्माच् छास्त्रात् तु यावज्जीवम् अनृतं मया न वक्तव्यम् इति येन संकल्पितं तस्य मिथ्यासंकल्पदोषो मा भूद् इति प्रायश्चित्तम् उच्यते । गेहदाहवधप्रतिषेधे[^५४] ऽपि नैमित्तिकं विधानम् । **एनसो निष्कृतिम्**[^५५] इत्य् अर्थवादः । 


[^५५]:
     DK: niṣkṛtir


[^५४]:
     M G DK: -vadhāpratiṣedhe

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथं</u> तर्हि[^५६] **वाग्दैवत्यैः सरस्वतीम् यजेरन्** । यदि वाग्देवता[^५७] सरस्वती कथम् इज्यते[^५८] । अथ वाक्सरस्वत्योर् एकत्वेनैवं देवताभावे शब्दावगम्यरूपत्वाद् देवताया भिन्नौ चेतौ वाक्सरस्वतीशब्दौ । यथाग्नये जुहोतीति चोदितेन ज्वलनाय कृशानवे वा स्वाहेति हूयते, वायवे निरूप्य जुहुयाद् वायुर् वै प्राण इत्य् उक्ते ऽपि न प्राणायेति हूयते ।


[^५८]:
     M G: iṣyate


[^५७]:
     M G: vāgdevatyāḥ


[^५६]:
     M G: idaṃ tarhi; DK idaṃ tarhi kathaṃ; I follow J.

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">सत्यम्</u> । वाग् एव देवता । सामानाधिकर्ण्याद् देवतार्थे तद्धितः ।[^५९] सरस्वतीम् इति[^६०] द्वितीयान्निर्देशात् । न हि[^६१] द्वितीयानिर्देश्या देवता । कर्मणि हि द्वितीया संप्रदानं च देवता, न कर्म । 


[^६१]:
     J omit: dvitīyānnirdeśāt | na hi


[^६०]:
     M G omit: iti


[^५९]:
     J adds: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथं</u> तर्हि सरस्वतीपदान्वयः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अर्थवादो</u> ऽयम् । अग्नये जुहोत्य् अग्निर् वै सर्वा देवता इति । वाग् एव सरस्वती । तयेष्टया सापीष्टा भवति । यागेन देवतावगम्यते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथम्</u> । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अग्निर्</u> यष्टव्यः प्रजापतिर् यष्टव्यस् तथाग्निं यजति यद् अग्निं यजतीत्यादि केचिद् आहुः । देवताः[^६२] स्वतस्[^६३] तत्र तत्र पूज्यन्ते । दैवतपूजावचनो ऽत्र यजिः । पूजा च पूज्यमानकर्मिका । तत्र युक्ता द्वितीया । तथा च देवता पूजनीयेत्यादि स्मर्यते । 


[^६३]:
     DK: devatās tu


[^६२]:
     M G: daivataiḥ

<u>एतच्</u> च न युक्तम् । अस्मिन् हि पक्षे देवतात्वम् अन्यतो मृग्यम् । तत्र[^६४] यागसंप्रदानं देवतेति स्मरणविरोधः । एषा च स्मृतिर् बलीयसी, निरपेक्षत्वात् । पूर्वा देवता उद्देश्या[^६५] ध्येया च । यस्यै देवतायै हविर् गृहीतं स्यात् तां मनसा ध्यायेद् इति तत्क्रियाकर्मत्वात् कर्मण्य् एषा द्वितीया ॥ ८.१०५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Speech-goddess*’—goddess in the form of speech; the rice boiled for
her is said to be ‘*dedicated* to the speech-goddess’;—Rice not
over-boiled is called ‘*chant*’;—with these they should offer
sacrifices.

We have ‘*carubhiḥ*,’ ‘with half-boiled rice,’ in the plural number, on
account of the plural number in the verb ‘*yajerau*’, ‘*they should
sacrifice*’; and it does not mean that each man shall offer several
kinds of rice. Nor is this offering to be made by several persons
collectively, as is done in the case of the *Vrātyastoma* offering. The
plural number in the present case is exactly analogous to the plural
number in such passages as—‘If it rains, many Brāhmaṇas should offer
*sacrifices*’; and it is not like that in the case of the ‘*kapiñjala
birds*’ (where *at least three* are meant).

In the case in question the lie is told for the sake of helping the
Brāhmaṇa or some such person; and this lying itself is a ‘*sin*’;—the
action of lying itself being a sin. The genitive ending in the phrase
‘*anṛtasyainaḥ*’ ‘sin of lying’ denotes apposition; just as in the
phrase ‘*Dharmakriyā*’ (where ‘*dharma*’ and ‘*kriyā*’ are in
apposition). Some people however hold that ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’ or
‘merit’ and ‘sin’ are *produced by actions* (and do not consist in the
actions themselves); and according to this view in the phrase ‘*anṛtasya
enaḥ*,’ ‘*sin of lying*,’ the terms ‘sin’ of ‘lying’ would not be in
apposition; the ‘sin’ being the *effect* of the lying, and hence
figuratively spoken of as being in apposition with it.

The ‘*niṣkṛti*’ of this sin is ‘purifying,’ ‘cleaning,’—*i.e*.,
expiation.

‘*Best*’—most excellent.

“Why should there be any sin in this case—when it has been declared that
there is nothing wrong in lying under the circumstances mentioned.”

Some people answer this objection by pointing out that the avoiding of
untruth leads to excellent results (even when the telling of untruth may
be permissible): a man may, on the basis of the scriptures, have taken
the vow that throughout his life he would not tell a lie; and if such a
man were to tell a lie for saving the life of a man, he would incur the
sin of having boon false to his vow; and it is in view of this sin that
the present text prescribes the expiation. Even though such acts as the
burning of a house and killing are prohibited, yet they have been
sanctioned under special conditions. Similarly we have (in the preceding
verse) the sanction for lying under special circumstances; hence the
mention of its ‘expiation’ must be regarded as a mere reference (to the
prohibition of lying in general).

*Question*.—“How can a sacrifice be offered to *Sarasvatī* with what has
been *dedicated to the goddess of speech?*” If the rice has been
‘dedicated’ to the Speech-goddess, how can the sacrifice be regarded as
offered to *Sarasvatī*? Or, if the two *Sarasvatīs* (one spoken of by
the name ‘*Sarasvati*, ‘while the other is referred to by the name
‘*speech-goddess*’) combined be regarded as the deity to whom the
sacrifice is offered,—then there arises this difficulty that, as a
matter of fact, the exact nature of the deity of a sacrifice can be
learnt entirely from *words*, and the two names here used are two
distinct words (so that both could not refer to the same deity); for
instance, if the injunction of an offering is in the form—‘the offering
should be made *to Agni*,’—people do not use the other names of
Agni,—such as ‘*Jvalana*’ ‘*Kṛśānu*’ and the like—when actually making
the sacrifice. Similarly when the injunction is in the form ‘one should
offer to *Vāyu*,’—even though it is distinctly laid down that ‘*Vaya* is
*Prāṇa*’—the name ‘*Prāṇa*’—is not used when the offering is actually
made.”

All this is quite true; ‘*speech-goddess*’ is the deity of the
sacrifice,—the nominal affix in the term ‘*vāgdaivatya*’ being
denotative of the deific character; and the deity is not denoted by the
term ‘*Sarasvatīm*,’ which appears with the accusative ending. Because
the Accusative ending denotes the *objective*, while the deity is the
*recipient*, and not the *objective*.

“How then is the term ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ to be construed?”

The present passage is only a hortatory exaggeration, just like the
assertion ‘one should make au offering to Agni, *Agni is all deities*;’
and what the present statement means is that ‘speech-goddess is
Sarasvatī herself, and hence when the offering is made to the former she
is pleased, and it reaches the other also.’

The character of the ‘deity’ is ascertained only through sacrifices; as
in the case of sacrifices offered to Agni, to Prajāpati and so forth
(where the fact of Agni or Prajāpati being the deity is ascertained only
by the sacrifice being offered to them).

Some people explain that what is meant is that the deities are to be
*worshipped*, the root ‘*yaji*’ (in ‘*yajeran*’) signifying the act of
*worshipping*; and the deity worshipped forms the *objective* of the
‘worship’; so that the use of the Accusative in ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ is only
right and proper. There are several such assertions as ‘*he worships the
deity*’ (where the deity is the object of the verb *to worship*).”

This however is not right. As under this view the *deific* character of
*Sarasvatī* will have to be deduced from somewhere else; and such an
interpretation would be contrary to the dictum that ‘the deific
character consists in being the *recipient* of a sacrificial offering.’
This dictum however, being self-sufficient, is highly authoritative.

The real explanation is that the deity to whom a sacrifice is offered is
to be made the recipient of the offering, and also to be meditated
upon,—according to the injunction, ‘One shall think in his mind of the
deity for whom the offering is held up’; so that the deity is also the
object of the act of *meditating*; and the accusative ending (in
‘*Sarasvatīm*’) actually denotes the *objective* itself.—(105)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kapiñjalaiḥ*’ (Medhātithi, p. 937, l. 11)—This refers to a case dealt
with in Mīmāṃsā-sūtra, where it is said that whenever the plural number
is used, we should understand it to mean *three*; for instance, when
‘Kapiñjala birds’ are spoken of as to be sacrificed. Medhātithi says
that this principle should not be applied to the present case of the
plural in ‘*Charrubhiḥ*’.

Nandana does not read the verse differently as asserted by Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 682), which adds that the plural
number in ‘*Carubhiḥ*’ is due to the plurality of the persons referred
to here—‘*te*’, ‘*they*’;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 432), which says
that this refers to the three higher castes only.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 390);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 355), which adds that ‘*Vāgdevatā*’ here must be
taken as standing for *Sarasvatī*, the terms ‘*Vāk*’ and ‘*Sarasvatī*’
being synonymous, specially as it is only thus that the offering shall
be consistent with its name ‘*Sacrifice to Sarasvatī*’; it proceeds to
add that the pronoun ‘*te*’ here stands for those witnesses who tell a
lie for saving a Brāhmaṇa or a Kṣatriya from death;—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 207); and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (38b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.105-106)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.83).—‘For expiating the sin involved in deposing
falsely for saving the life of a man, twice-born persons should offer
the cooked rice dedicated to Sarasvatī.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.16-17).—‘In order to expiate the sin committed (by deposing
falsely for saving the life of a man), the witness, if he is a
twice-born person, must pour an oblation into the fire, consecrating it
with the Mantra-texts called *Kūṣmāṇḍī*; if he is a Śūdra, he must feed
ten cows for one day.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.16).—‘Let him who has given false evidence (for any
reason) drink hot milk during twelve days and nights, and pour oblations
into the fire with the mantras called *Kūṣmāṇḍī*.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सरस्वतीं यजेरन्न् "अहं रुद्रेभिर् वसुभिश् चरामि" इत्य् अनेनाष्टर्चेन सूक्तेन । त्रिर् अभ्यासश् चरोः । अनाश्रितबहुत्वविशेषाच् चोदनाया, यथा "वसन्ताय कपिञ्जलान् आलभते" इति ॥ ८.१०६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

105	Such (witnesses) must offer to Sarasvati oblations of boiled rice (karu) which are sacred to the goddess of speech, (thus) performing the best penance in order to expiate the guilt of that falsehood.
</details>
