+++
title = "114 अग्निं वाहारयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Or, he may make him fetch fire, or make him dive under water, or make him touch the heads of his son and wife severally.—(114)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अग्निम् आहारयेद् एनं** हस्तेनाश्वत्थपर्णव्यवहितेन तयोः प्रदेशान्तरं सप्तपदसंहितम् इत्यादि**स्मृत्यन्तरान्** निपुणतो ऽन्वेष्यम् । पारंपर्यप्रसिद्धेश् चैतद् एवोच्यते । **अप्सु** जले **निमज्जयेत्** प्राड्विवाक इत्यर्थः । **पुत्रदारशिरांसि स्पर्शयेत्** । पुत्रस्य दारस्य शिरः स्पर्शयन् हस्तेन, शपथादिकाराद् वाचापि,[^१०७] शपथस्यैवंरूपत्वाद् इत्य् उक्तम् । **पृथग्** एकैकस्य ॥ ८.११४ ॥


[^१०७]:
     M G DK (1:438): vācā ca
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He shall make him fetch water*’—with the hand, with only the leaf of
the fig tree intervening. As for the other details, regarding the man
going seven steps and so forth,—all this may be found in other *Smṛtis*
(*e.g*., Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 103, and Nārada 2.296). The matter
being well known by tradition, our author has simply stated the
‘fetching of fire.’

‘*He*,’ *i.e*., the Judge—‘shall make him dive under water.’

‘*He shall make him touch the heads of his son and wife,
secerally*,’—the man shall touch the head with his hand; and as this
occurs in the context dealing with ‘oaths,’ the man should be made to
utter the swearing words also.

‘*Severally*’—separately, one by one.—(114)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 694);—the second half in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 611);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 71b and
88b), which says that the touching of the head is to be done with the
right hand.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.114-116)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.96-113).—‘The Balance for women, children, aged
persons, the lame, the Brāhmaṇa and the invalid; Fire or Water or seven
*Yavas* or seven Poisons for the Śūdra. Neither the Plough-share nor the
Poison nor the Balance shall he used in suits whose value is less than a
thousand *paṇas*; hut in connection with the business of the King, or
when one is accused of heinous crimes, the pure men shall always use
these. (Then follows the detailed procedure of the ordeals.)’

*Viṣṇu* (Chapters 10 to 14).—\[Rules regarding ordeal by Balance in
Chap. 10, regarding that by fire in Chap. 11: ‘That man whose hands are
burnt ever so little should be deemed guilty; but if he remains wholly
unburnt, he is freed from the charge regarding that by Water, in Chap.
12: ‘The defendant should enter water;...... if he is not seen above the
water during the time that a man brings back a discharged arrow, he is
proclaimed innocent; hut in the contrary case, he is declared guilty,
even though only one limb of his may have become visible;’—regarding
that by Poison in Chap. 13:—and regarding that by Sacred Libation, in
Chap. 14.\]

*Nārada* (1.251-253).—‘Holy Manu has ordained that five kinds of ordeals
should be administered to those involved in a doubtful case, specially
if the matter under dispute is of a recondite nature. The Balance, Fire,
Water, Poison and fifthly, Consecrated Water are the ordeals ordained
for the purgation of high-minded persons. Those ordeals have been
ordained by Nārada, for the purpose of proving the innocence of
criminals who are defendants in a law-suit, and in order that right may
be discerned from wrong.’ \[Then follow detailed instructions regarding
the ordeals, up to verse 348.\]—‘If the members of the court should
declare him unhurt, he shall he honourably released as innocent; if he
is burnt, he shall receive due punishment’ (363).—‘If the man returning
with the discharged arrow does not see the defendant rising in water,
the defendant should he acquitted; otherwise he is guilty; even though
only one limb of his may have become visible’ (311-312).

*Bṛhaspati* (10.4-2).—‘The Balance, Fire, Water, Poison, and fifthly,
Sacred Libation, *sixthly* grains of rice, *seventhly*, a hot piece of
gold, are declared to he *ordeals*;—the Plough-share is mentioned as the
eighth; the ordeal by Dharmas the ninth. Truth, a vehicle, weapons,
cows, grains, gold, venerable gods and Brāhmaṇas, the heads of sons and
wives,—by these have oaths to be taken. When a dispute between two
litigants has arisen regarding a debt or some other matter, that ordeal
is to be administered which is in keeping with the amount of the sum in
dispute and with the character and strength of the person to he
examined. The ordeal by Poison should he administered where property
worth a thousand has been stolen; that by Fire when it is a quarter less
than that; when the charge concerns four hundred, the Hot Piece of Gold
should be administered; when three hundred, Grains of Rice should be
used; and the Sacred Libation, when it is half of that; when a hundred
has been stolen, or falsely denied, purgation by Dharma should be
administered; thieves of cows should be subjected, by preference, to
ordeal by the Plough-share.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.493 *et seq*.).—‘When the plaintiff is not prepared to
accept the result of the ordeal as final, the ordeal shall not be
administered: an ordeal is to be administered to the Accused only; never
shall the judge ask the accuser to go through the ordeal; but if he so
wills it, he may be put through it. In the case of those who have been
suspected by the King, ordeal may be prescribed. In cases of adultery
and incestuous intercourse, and of heinous offences, ordeal shall be
administered; there is no other proof. In the case of those against whom
there is a presumptive charge of theft, the ordeal of lifting a small
piece of metal out of boiling oil is ordained. In the case of indictment
for murder, even though human evidence be available, if the accuser
volunteers to have recourse to ordeal, the human evidence may be
ignored. Where the witness that is produced is suspected of dishonesty,
the King shall, before admitting his evidence, test him by means of an
ordeal.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.40).—‘Whenever a perjured witness has given false evidence in
a suit, the King must reverse the judgment; and whatever has been done
should be regarded as undone.’

*Nārada* (2.40).—‘When a man has lost his cause through the dishonesty
of witnesses or judges, the cause may be tried anew.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

शूद्रस्य वृत्तापेक्षयाग्न्यादयो ऽपि कल्प्येरन् । शपथैर् एवम् । तत्राग्निहरणे सप्तपदाश्वत्थपत्रैर् इयद्भिर् व्यवधानम् इति [स्मृत्यन्तरो]पेक्षयैतत् स्यात्; इहावचनं च गुणविधेः, स्मृतिपारम्पर्याविच्छेदात् । तथाप्सु निमज्जने कालः ॥ ८.११५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

114	Or the (judge) may cause the (party) to carry fire or to dive under water, or severally to touch the heads of his wives and children.
</details>
