+++
title = "123 कौटसाक्ष्यन् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall however fine and then banish the three castes giving false evidence; but the Brāhmaṇa he shall deprive of his clothes (and dwelling).—(123)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सकृद् अपराद्धानां पूर्वो दण्डः । अभ्यासात् प्रवर्तमानानां **दण्डयित्वा प्रवासनं** राष्ट्रान् निष्कासनम्, मरणं वार्थशास्त्रे प्रयोगदर्शनात् तद्रूपत्वाच् च दण्डविधेः । **ब्राह्मणं तु विवासयेत्** । वाससो ऽपहरणं विवासनं गृहभङ्गो वा । विवाससं[^१४२] विवासं वा[^१४३] करोति "तत् करोति" इति णिचि णाविष्टवद् इति टिलोपे रूपम् । **त्रीन् वर्णान्** इति क्षत्रादयस् त्रयः, ब्राह्मणस्य दण्डान्तरविधानात् ॥ ८.१२३ ॥


[^१४३]:
     M G J omit: vā


[^१४२]:
     J omits: vivāsasaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The penalties prescribed above are for the first offenders; for repeated
offenders there is fining, followed by ‘banishment,’—*i.e*., expulsion
from the kingdom;—or death; rules regarding the inflicting of such
penalty being met with in political science.

‘*But the Brāhmaṇa he shall deprive of his clothes*’;—‘*vivāsana*’
meaning *depriving of clothes*, or *of dwelling*. The verb is formed
from the noun ‘*vivāsa*,’ ‘homeless,’ ‘clothesless,’ with the causal
affix ‘*ṇic*,’ which makes the nominal verb ‘makes *vivāsa*.’

‘*The three Castes*’—the *Kṣatriya* and the rest;—since for the Brāhmaṇa
a separate punishment is prescribed.—(123)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pravāsayet*’—‘Banish’ (all concur). But Medhātithi suggests ‘put to
death’, as an alternative; this is accepted by Mitākṣarā (see below).

‘*Vivāsayet*’—‘Should deprive him of his clothes (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja),—‘or homestead’ (Medhātithi, alternative);—‘banish (without
*fining*, as in the case of the other three castes)’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.81), which adds the following
notes:—This rule is meant for repeated offence, as is clear from the
*present participle* affix in ‘*kurvāṇān*’ (which implies *habit*); on
the three castes, Kṣatriya and the rest, the king should impose the
aforesaid fine and then put *them to death*;—the root ‘*pravāsa*’ is
used in the sense of *killing* in works dealing with political science;
and this part of the law-book is a treatise on that science. This
*putting to death* is of various kinds—cutting the lips, cutting the
tongue and actual *killing*; which one of these is to be adopted in any
particular case will depend upon the nature of the case in regard to
which the man may have given false evidence. The Brāhmaṇa, on the other
hand, is to be fined and *banished*, removed from the kingdom; or
‘*vivāsayet*’ may mean *deprive him of his clothes*, strip him naked;—or
again ‘*vāsa*’ meaning the *dwelling house*, ‘*vivāsayet*’ may mean
‘should deprive him of his house’, his house should be demolished. In
the case of the Brāhmaṇa also, if the offence is the first one of its
kind, and the man is not found to have been actuated by any such sordid
motive as ‘greed’ and the rest,—only simple fine is to be imposed; but
if the offence is repeated, there is to be fine and also ‘*vivāsana*’,
*i*.*e*., banishment, or stripping naked, or rendering homeless; which
one of these three is to be adopted will depend upon the character of
the parties, the nature of the subject-matter of dispute and so forth.
If the Brāhmaṇa is not found to have been actuated by greed or any such
motive, if the offence is the first of its kind, and if the
subject-matter of the dispute is a petty one,—then he also is to be only
slightly fined, like the Kṣatriya and other lower castes; but if the
subject-matter of the dispute is an important one, then he is to be
*banished*. In the case of the offence being repeated, the punishment
for all the castes is to be as prescribed by Manu.

This verse is quoted also in *Aparārka* (p. 680), which explains the
meaning as follows:—The three lower castes are to be fined and banished,
while the Brāhmaṇa is to be only banished) not fined;—though if the
offence is repeated, or if the issues involved in the case are
important, the Brāhmaṇa also may be fined.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 119);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191), which
adds the note:—‘If a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya or a Śūdra is found to depose
falsely repeatedly, he should, in addition to the aforesaid fines, be
banished from the country,—and in the ease of a Brāhmaṇa, he should be
banished with all his belongings’;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37b), which
explains ‘*vivāsayet*’ as ‘should he banished from the kingdom’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 57a), which adds the explanation
that—persons of the three castes other than the Brāhmaṇa are to he fined
and then *killed*—the ‘killing’ consisting either in cutting off the
lips or lopping off the tongue or down-right killing, in accordance with
the gravity of the offence;—the Brāhmaṇa, is to be *banished* or
*rendered naked*,—the verb ‘*vivāsayet*’ meaning ‘deprived of *vāsa*,
habitation or clothes’. It adds that all this refers to cases of
repeated perjury.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[एकदानृतवादिनां दण्डाः पूर्वोक्ताः], अभ्यसतां तु कौटसाक्ष्यं त्रयाणां वर्णानां दण्डश् चायं यथाशास्त्रम् । प्रवासनं च मारणं शास्त्रान्तरे परिभाषितत्वाद्, इह च तदभ्यासान् निर्वासनम् एव [प्रतिपद्यते **ब्राह्मण]म् एव विवासयेत्** इति । गृहभङ्गेन चायोजयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । पूर्वस्मिंश् चार्थे प्रवासनशब्दस्य निर्वासनं ब्राह्मणस्यैव ॥ ९.१२४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

123	But a just king shall fine and banish (men of) the three (lower) castes (varna) who have given false evidence, but a Brahmana he shall (only) banish.
</details>
