+++
title = "140 वसिष्ठविहितां वृद्धिम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The money-lender shall stipulate an interest sanctioned by Vasiṣṭha, for increasing the capital. He shall take monthly the eightieth part of a hundred.—(140)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अशीतीति** विधेयनिर्देशः । **वसिष्ठविहिताम्** इत्यादिर् अर्थवादः । वसिष्ठो भववान् त्रिकालज्ञो लोभादिदोषरहित इति[^१८१] तां **वृद्धिं** गृहीतवान्, अत एषा प्रशस्ता । धनं तया वृद्धिम् उपैति, न च लोभदोषो ऽस्ति । **सृजेत्** प्रयुञ्जीत । यदा धनं तदाधर्मणस्य तां वृद्धिं धनप्रयोगकाले निर्दिशेत् । सर्वद्रव्येषु वस्त्रधान्यहिरण्यादिष्व् एतद् एव वृद्धिपरिमाणम् । संख्येयपरिमेयादिषु[^१८२] "रसस्याष्टगुणा वृद्धिः" (च्ड़्। य्ध् २.४०) इत्यादिषु द्वैगुण्यापवाद इति वक्ष्यामः ॥ ८.१४० ॥


[^१८२]:
     M G J: -parameyādiṣu (I follow DK 5: 1183)


[^१८१]:
     DK (5: 1183) omits: iti
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He shall take, etc*.’ (the second half of the verse) represents the
injunction; and what is said regarding its being ‘*sanctioned by*
*Vasiṣṭha*’ is merely commendatory;—the sense being that ‘Vasiṣṭha, the
revered sage, cognisant of all that happens at the three points of time
and devoid of greed, accepted interest, hence it is commendable.’ ‘By
its means one’s capital increases, and yet there is no impropriety in it
on the ground of its being indicative of greed.

‘*Stipulate*,’—Employ; at the time that he is advancing money to the
debtor, he should clearly stipulate the rate of interest.

In the case of all things that can be counted or measured,—such as
clothes, grains, gold and so forth- the rate of interest is to be as
here laid down. In the case of liquor, however, the rate of interest has
been declared to be eight times of the principal,—and this is an
exception to the limit that the total amount of the debt shall not
exceed the double of the principal, as we shall explain later on.—(140)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule, here attributed to Vasiṣṭha, actually occurs in
Vasiṣṭha-Dharmaśāstra, 2.51.

“According to Kullūka, (on 142), Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda and Nandana,
this rule refers to a debt secured by a pledge, find the correctness of
this view is proved by the parallel passage of Yājñavalkya
(2.37).”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, p. 7, which explains
‘*māsāt*’ as ‘after the lapse of one month,’ and adds that this refers
to debt that is secured by a pledge that can be enjoyed (by the
creditor).

*Smṛtitattva* (p. 349) quotes the second half and adds that ‘of 100
*kārṣāpaṇas*’, the ‘eightieth part’ would be 20 *paṇas*.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 420), which explains
‘*aśītibhāgam*’ as 20 *paṇas*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 91b), which says that this refers to cases
of mortgage, and the meaning is that when 100 rupees have been advanced,
the creditor should charge 1¼ rupee after the lapse of one month.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.140-142)  
**

*Gautama* (12.29-30).—‘The legal interest for money lent is five *māṣas*
a month for twenty *kārṣāpaṇas*. Some declare that this rate should not
he paid longer than one year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.48).—‘They quote the following—2, 3, 4 or 5, in the
hundred, he may take as interest per month, according to the order of
the castes.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.51).—‘The interest for a money-lender declared by Vaśiṣṭha
is five *māṣas* for twenty *Kāṛṣāpanas*, per month.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.37).—‘In the case of loans with pledges, the interest
per month shall be the eightieth part; in those without pledges, it
shall be 2, 3, 4 or 5 per cent, respectively for the Brāhmaṇa, the
Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.’

*Nārada* (1.99-101).—‘Let a money-lender take, in addition to the
principal, the interest fixed by Vaśiṣṭha, *viz*., an eightieth part of
a hundred every month. 2, 3, or 5 (in the hundred) is the legitimate
rate of interest; let him take as much in the shape of interest, every
month, in the direct order of the four castes. Or let him take 2 in the
100, remembering the practice of the virtuous.

*Bṛhaspati* (11.3).—‘An eightieth part of the principal accrues as
interest on it every month; and it is doubled by such interest within
six years and eight months.’

*Artha-Śāstra* (p. 61).—‘The legal interest, per month, on every 100
Paṇas, is 1¼ Paṇas; it is 5 Paṇas in business transactions; 10 Paṇas for
people trading in forests; and 20 Paṇas for those trading on the seas.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.1-5).—‘A creditor shall receive his principal back from his
debtor exactly as he had lent it to him. As regards interest, he shall
take, in the direct order of the castes, 2, 3, 4 or 5 percent., per
month, if no pledge has been given; or the debtor of any caste may pay
as much as has been promised by him. After the lapse of one year, let
them pay interest according to the afore-mentioned rule, even though it
may not have been agreed upon. By the use of the pledge, interest
becomes forfeited.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अशीतभागः प्रथमः कल्पः प्रयुक्तस्यार्थस्य वृद्धिः ॥ ८.१३९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

140	A money-lender may stipulate as an increase of his capital, for the interest, allowed by Vasishtha, and take monthly the eightieth part of a hundred.
</details>
