+++
title = "143 न त्व्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But when there is profitable pledge, he shall receive no interest on the loan; and there shall be neither transference nor sale of the pledge, merely by the lapse of time.—(143)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

बहुधा प्रयोगः- गृहीत्वाधिम् अन्यथा च । आधिर् अपि द्विविधः- गोप्यो भोग्यश् च । भोग्यो ऽपि द्विविधः- समयाद् उह्यमानभोगः सरूपतो वा । आधिर् दोग्ध्री गौः पिहितसुवर्णादि । 

- तत्र भोग्यम् आधिम् अधिकृत्येदम् उच्यते । **न त्व् एवाधौ सोपकार** इति । विविधः[^१९१] सोपकारः- क्षीरिणी गौः क्षेत्रारामादि च । तस्मिन् भुज्यमाने — कुसीदे भवा **कौसीदी** अनन्तरोक्ता वृद्धिस् — ताम् नाप्नुयात्[^१९२] । आधिं तु भुञ्जानो नान्यां वृद्धिं लभेत । गोप्ये ऽप्य् आधौ **कालसंरोधाच्** चिरम् अवस्थानाद् द्विगुणीभूते ऽप्य् अमोक्षमाणे[^१९३] **न निसर्गो ऽस्ति न विक्रयः** । अन्यत्र च विधिनार्पणं **निसर्गः** । अन्यत्र संक्रामितं[^१९४] द्विगुणीभूतम् अपि पुनर् वर्धत एव । तथा अ पठिष्यति "सकृद् आहृता" (म्ध् ८.१५१) इति । **विक्रयः** प्रसिद्धः । सो ऽपि न कर्तव्यः । 


[^१९४]:
     J: saṃkrāmi


[^१९३]:
     DK (5: 1184) suggests: amokṣyamāṇe


[^१९२]:
     M G DK (1: 638): āpnuyāt (omit "na"); but DK (5: 1184) retains "na"


[^१९१]:
     M G: vividha-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">किं तर्ह्य्</u> अस्याम् अवस्थायां कर्तव्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">तावद्</u>[^१९५] <u>आधिं</u> भुञ्जीत यावद् द्विगुणं धनं प्रविष्टम् । ततः, 


[^१९५]:
     M G DK omit: tāvad

- मोच्य आधिस् तदुत्पन्ने प्रविष्टे द्विगुणे धने । (य्ध् २.६६) 

भोग्यस् तावद् एवम्[^१९६] । भोग्यस्[^१९७] त्व् आधिः शान्तलभस् तिष्ठत्य् एव यावद् आधाता नागतः । यस् तु कथंचिद् धनिको दरिद्रताम् उपगतस् तावन्मात्रशेषधनः स कंचित् कालं प्रतीक्ष्य राजनि निवेद्य विक्रीणीत बन्धम्, ततो विक्रयाद् उत्पन्नं द्विगुणम् आत्मनो धनं गृहीत्वा शेषं मध्यस्थहस्ते ऋणिकसात्कुर्यात् ।


[^१९७]:
     M G: abhogyas


[^१९६]:
     M G DK (1: 638) add: abhogyas tāvat evam; J adds: abhogyas tadanantaram (the reading here is rather confused).

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु च</u> 

- आधिः प्रणश्येद् द्विगुणे धने यदि न मोक्षयेत् । (य्ध् २.६०) 

इति पठ्यते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">एतद् उत्तरत्र</u> व्याख्यास्यामः । प्रणाश्यत्वान् न[^१९८] पूर्वस्वामिनः स्वाम्यहानिः प्रयोक्तुश् च स्वत्त्वापत्तिः । यदि च निसर्गविक्रयौ न स्तः, कीदृशम् अस्य स्वाम्यम् उच्यते । तस्मात् प्रतिषेधसामर्थ्येन प्रणाशवचनं प्रतिषिद्धभोगस्य[^१९९] भोगानुज्ञानार्थं व्याख्यायते । वस्त्रादिविषयं वा । तस्य हि भुज्यमानस्य प्रणाश एव । न क्षेत्रादेर् इव तिष्ठतः स्वरूपाद् प्रच्यवमानस्य[^२००] भोग्यता संभवति । तेनैतत् स्मृतिव्यवस्थायां व्याख्येयम् । 


[^२००]:
     M G J: svarūpāt prapacyavamānasya; DK (1: 638): acyavamānasya (I follow DK 5: 1184; reading is unclear)


[^१९९]:
     M G: praṇāśavacanapratiṣiddhabhoga iti


[^१९८]:
     DK (1: 638) suggests : praṇāśyatvaṃ cātra; (5: 1184): praṇāśyatvam atra

गौणौ चात्र प्रणाशनिसर्गौ । विक्रयप्रतिषेधस् तु मुख्य एव । न ह्य् असौ गौणतया प्रतिपत्तुं शक्यते । एतद् एव प्रस्तुत्य "न स्यातां विक्रयाधीने" इति स्मृत्यन्तरपठितम्[^२०१] । अत इह **निसर्गो** ऽन्यत्राधानम्, विक्रयसाहचर्यात् ।सदृशौ हि तौ केनचिद् अंशेन ॥ ८.१४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Money-lending is done in various forms—with pledge as well as without
pledge. Pledge also is of two kinds—*to be used* and *to be kept*. That
*to be used* is again of two kinds—(*a*) that in which the profit
consists in some form of product of the pledged article and (*b*) that
which is used as it stands; the milch cow belongs to the former class,
and wrought gold, etc., to the latter.

What is said here regarding the case ‘*when there is profitable pledge*’
refers to the pledge *to be used*.

The ‘*profitable pledge*’ is of various kinds, such as the milch cow,
fields, gardens and so forth.

While such a pledge is being used by the money-lender, ‘*he shall
receive no interest*,’ such as that laid down in the foregoing
verses—‘*on the loan*.’ That is, he who is deriving a profit from the
pledge shall receive no other kind of interest.

In the case of the pledge *to be kept* also, ‘*merely by the lapse of
time*,’—simply because a longtime has elapsed,—even becoming doable of
its former size, and the pledge remains unredeemed,—‘*there shall be
neither transference nor selling*.’ ‘*Transference*’ consists in the
article being duly made over to another person. Even though already
doubled, the principal, even on the transference of the pledge, shall
continue to grow: as is going to be declared later on—‘*sakṛdāhṛta*,’
etc. ‘*Selling*’ is well known. This also shall not be done.

“What then is to be done in such cases?”

The man shall continue to use (derive proñt from) the pledge, till the
principal has become doubled and repaid; when it shall be redeemed. When
the doubled principal has been repaid, the pledge ‘to be used’ shall
cease to be used, and that ‘to be kept’ shall be returned. The pledge
‘to be used’ shall remain with the creditor till the debt is
repaid,—unless there is some damage. If there is some damage done, and
the creditor somehow has become too poor, having no other property
except that pledged article, then, having waited for some time, he shall
report it to the king and sell the article; and from the sale-proceeds
he shall take an amount which is just the double of his principal, and
hand over to a middle-man the balance for being paid over to the debtor.

“But it is declared that—‘if on the principal having been doubled, the
pledge is not redeemed, it becomes lost (forfeited)’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 58)”

This we are going to explain. As a matter of fact, this ‘forfeiture’ or
‘loss’ does.not mean that the former owner entirely loses his ownership,
and the person having it acquires ownership over it. For when there can
be no ‘transference or sale,’ what sort of ‘ownership’ would the man
acquire? Hence, by virtue of the said prohibition of ‘transference or
sale,’ the ‘loss’ or ‘forfeiture’ must he taken to mean that the
creditor who may have ceased to use it becomes entitled to use it again.
Or the term ‘loss’ may he taken as referring to such things as clothes
and the like, which naturally become ‘lost’ (perished) by using; and
which cannot continue to be *used* even when they have lost their
original form,—in the manner in which lands and other such things can
continue to be. It is in this sense that the Smṛti has to be explained.

In fact, the term ‘loss’ has been used in the figurative sense, of
permitting the *use* of it; while the prohibition of ‘transference and
sale’ must be taken in its literal sense; as this latter is not capable
of being understood in a figurative sense. It is in this sense that, we
have another *Smṛti* text to the effect that ‘there shall be no selling
or handing over of pledges, etc., etc.’ What is spoken of as ‘handing
over’ in this text is the same as ‘transference,’ as is clear from its
being mentioned along with ‘sale,’—both of them being similar in certain
respects.—(143)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Medhātithi Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa, the last clause
refers to pledges which are not used; but Kullūka objects that this is
contrary to the common practice of the *Śiṣṭas*; and Rāghavānanda refers
to Yājñavalkya, 2.48. where it is clearly stated that beneficial pledges
only are never lost, while those which are merely kept are lost when the
original debt is doubled by unpaid interest.”—Buhler.

The first part of this verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 23),
which explains ‘*sopakāre*’ as ‘what is used or enjoyed’;—in *Aparārka*
(p. 659);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 15), which explains ‘*sopakāre*’ as
‘used’ or ‘enjoyed,’ and the mere fact of the thing having been used
deprives the creditor of the interest, and if, through some act of the
creditor, the article mortgaged loses its usefulness, the interest
ceases;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (70a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
95a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.143-144)  
**

*Gautama* (12-32).—‘A loan secured by a pledge that is used by the
creditor bears no interest.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.5).—‘If the pledge is used, interest becomes forfeited.’

*Nārada* (l.125-229).—‘A pledge is of two kinds—one to be kept, and one
for use. It must be preserved in the same condition in which it was
given; otherwise, the pledgee loses interest...... A pledge must not be
used forcibly; by so using it, the pledgee forfeits the interest due to
him. That foolish person who uses a pledge without the authority of the
owner, shall lose one half of his interest, as a compensation for such
use. If a *pledge for use* has been given, the creditor must not take
interest due on the loan.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.18 *et seq*.).—‘Should the creditor, actuated by
avarice, use a pledge before interest has ceased to accrue on the loan,
or before the stipulated period has expired, such use shall be stopped.
The pledge has to be kept carefully, like a deposit; interest becomes
forfeited in the event of its being damaged. If the pledge is used and
rendered worthless, the principal itself becomes forfeited; if a very
valuable pledge be spoilt, the creditor must satisfy the pledger.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.59).—‘There is no interest payable, if a pledge given
as deposit is used, or if a pledge given for use is destroyed; if it is
spoilt or lost, it should be replaced; except when such loss has been
due to an act of god or the King.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 659).—‘If the pledge in the form of gold and the
like, has been destroyed by the fault of the creditor, the debtor shall
pay the principal along with the interest accrued, and the creditor
shall be made to pay the value of the pledge to the debtor.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If the pledgee makes use of the pledge without
authorisation, he shall pay the price of such use; or else, he shall
forfeit the interest.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 3).—‘The man who uses the pledge should pay the price
of such use; also a fine of 12 *paṇas*; if, by such use, the pledge
becomes lost or spoilt, the user should replace it, and also be fined 21
*paṇas*; so also when the pledge becomes lost in any other way. A pledge
given for use should not be allowed to be destroyed; nor in this case
should any interest accrue; if it is given for mere keeping and not for
use, then interest shall accrue.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

भुञ्जानस्य हि प्रयोक्तुर् आधिं क्षेत्रादिकं वृद्धिर् न स्यात् । अर्थाच् चानुपकारिण्याधौ सोपकारे ऽपि च समयाद् अभुज्यमाने स्याद् वृद्धिः । न चाधेर् अभोग्यस्य कालसंरोधाद् द्विगुणीभूते ऽर्थे काले ऽधिगच्छति निसर्गो ऽस्यान्यत्राधमनम् अननुज्ञातस्य गृहीत्रा । किं तु यावद् धनं न प्रयच्छेद् द्विगुणीभूतं तावद् आधिं भुञ्जीतैव सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते, प्रयुक्तार्थसाधनाय । विक्रयसाधर्म्याच् चान्यत्राधमनं निसर्गो विज्ञायते । एवं विक्रयो ऽपि विज्ञेयः । तथा च सत्य् अर्थप्रयोगकाल एव प्रतिषिद्धेन प्रयोक्त्रा — ॥ ८.१४२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

143	But if a beneficial pledge (i.e. one from which profit accrues, has been given), he shall receive no interest on the loan; nor can he, after keeping (such) a pledge for a very long time, give or sell it.
</details>
