+++
title = "147 यत् किम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whatever thing the owner meekly sees being used by others in his presence, for ten years,—that thing he does not deserve to recover.—(147)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यत् किंचिद् भुज्यमानम्** इत्य् व्यवस्थितेन[^२२६] संबन्धः । **धनीति** संनिधानात् सामान्यनिर्देशे ऽपि भुज्यमानधनोपेक्षणं[^२२७] प्रतीयते । **यत् किंचिद्** इति दासीदासासारभाण्डादि[^२२८] सर्वं ग्राहयति । न हि तल् लोके ऽत्यन्तं धनम् इति प्रसिद्धम्, गोभूहिरण्याद्य् एव महार्घं धनम् इति प्रसिद्धतरम् । तेनायम् अत्र वाक्यार्थः । **यत् किंचिद्** द्रव्यं परेण **भुज्यमानं** **धनी** धनस्वामी **दशवर्षाणि** यावत् **प्रेक्षते,** न किंचिद् वक्ति, न राजनि व्यवहरति, न कुलसमक्षं भोक्तारं वदति "मदीयम् एतत् किम् इति त्वया स्वयं भुज्यते" इति, **स** दशभ्यो वर्षेभ्य उत्तरकालं **न** **तल् लब्धुं** स्वीकर्तुम् **अर्हति** । निवर्तते ऽस्य स्वत्वम्[^२२९] इति यावत् । प्रेक्षणेन ज्ञेयतामात्रम् उच्यते, न प्रत्यक्षतैव । **संनिधाव्** इति वक्ष्यामः । 


[^२२९]:
     M G J: svam; DK (1: 386) svāmyam; I follow DK 5: 1187


[^२२८]:
     DK (1:386): dāsadāsīsārāsārabhāṇḍādi


[^२२७]:
     DK (5: 1187) suggests: dhanāpekṣaṇaṃ


[^२२६]:
     M G: avasthitena

**परैः,** न ज्ञातिसंबन्धिभिः । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम् "ज्ञातिसंबन्धिभिर् विना" इति ।


- संबन्धिबान्धवैश् चैव भुक्तं यज् जातिभिस् तथा ।

- न तद् भोगो[^२३०] निवर्तेत भोगम् अन्यत्र कल्पयेत् ॥


[^२३०]:
     DK (1: 386): bhogān

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । अव्यवस्थैवं सति स्यात् । "के ज्ञातयः के वा संबन्धिनः" इति । संबन्धमात्रग्रहणे न किंचिद् व्यावर्त्यम् । तस्माद् येनान्यदीयं भुज्यते स एवं[^२३१] भवति । किं तु तथा सति परशब्दो ऽनुवादमात्रम् अनर्थः, कस्यापि न परव्यपदेशः । स निरस्यते,[^२३२] यथा भार्यापती पितापुत्राव् इति । तत्र ह्य् आत्मन्य् अपि व्यपदेशो ऽस्ति "अर्धो ह वा एष आत्मनो यज् जाया" (श्ब् ५.२.१.१०), "आत्मा वै पुत्र नामासि" (श्ब् १४.९.४.२६) इति । तेन दम्पत्योः पितृपुत्रयोर् न भोगाभोगौ कारणम् । तेषाम् अपि विभक्तधनानां भोगकाले प्राप्ते ऽभोगो बाधक एव । भार्याया अपि स्त्रीधने भर्तृसकाशाद् गृहीते बन्धेन पत्युर् भोगे नासिद्धिः । सा ह्य् आत्यन्तपरवती । नोभयोर् विभागो ऽस्ति । स्त्रीधनम् अपि तेनैव तस्याः परिपालनीयम् । "राजस्त्रीश्रोत्रियद्रव्याद्[^२३३] अन्यत्र" इति च पट्ःयते । 


[^२३३]:
     MG: rājñā; J: rājā (all outside the compound)


[^२३२]:
     DK: anarthakaḥ syāt | yasya parasyāpi na paravyapadeśaḥ sa nirasyate


[^२३१]:
     DK (1: 386): sa para eva

- एवम् अनेन स्वामिन उपेक्षमाणस्य स्वाम्यहानिर् उक्ता ॥ ८.१४७ ॥

_कस्य तर्हि तत् संभवतीत्य् एवम् अर्थम् उत्तरश्लोकः ।_ "न स तल् लब्धुम् अर्हति" इत्य् अस्य शेषः- "अजडश् चेद् अपोगण्डः**"** इति[^२३४] ।


[^२३४]:
     M G DK (1: 384): yadi connection it with jaḍaḥ at the beginning of the following commentary.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Whatever thing being used*,’ etc.—such is the construction, ‘*being
used*’ being brought back to the beginning.

‘*Owner*;’—though this general term has been used, yet the person meant
is the owner of the thing whose use is being ignored.

‘*Whatever thing*’—includes all kinds of property, slaves, slave-girls,
utensils large and small, and so forth; though all this is not usually
spoken of as ‘*dhana*,’ ‘property,’ ‘wealth,’—which name is applied to
gold, silver and other valuable articles.

The moaning of the sentence thus is this:—“When the owner of a property
sees, for ten years, a certain property of his being used by another
person,—and says nothing,—*i.e*., does not file a suit before the king,
nor says to the user before his family ‘how is it that you are using
this thing which belongs to me?’—such a man, after the lapse of ten
years, does not deserve to ‘*recover*’—obtain possession of—that
thing;—*i.e*., his ownership entirely ceases.”

What is meant by ‘*seeing*’ is *knowledge*, and not actual *seeing with
the eyes*; which latter is expressed by the term ‘*in his presence*.’

‘*By others*’—is explained by some to mean *not by collaterals or
relatives*; another *Smṛti* text adding these ‘collaterals and
relatives’ as exceptions to the present rule:—‘when a thing is used by
relatives and collaterals, the ownership does not cease.’

This however is not right; as this explanation would make the rule
indefinite; it being uncertain who are to be regarded as ‘collaterals’
and ‘relatives.’ If ‘relationship’ in general were meant, then there
would be no one left (who would not hear some sort of relationship to
the man). Consequently the text must be taken to mean that the rule hero
laid down applies to all cases where some one else uses a thing
belonging ṭo another person.

In this case however the term ‘others’ would be merely re-iterative, and
as such superfluous. For there is no person to whom the term ‘other’
could be applicable. The wife, the father and the son are all spoken of
as ‘one’s own self;’ specially in such texts as—‘the wife is the half of
one’s self,’ ‘it is one’s own self that is called the *son*.’ Hence
between husband and wife, or between father and son, mere *using* cannot
he regarded as a ground of ownership. In fact in their case also, if
they are separated, when the time of using has arrived, if one does not
use it, this fact becomes a precluder of his ownership. In the case of
the wife’s dowry, if it has been pledged by the husband, her ownership
does not cease by *using*, so long as the husband is alive, and the
reason for this is that she is entirely dependent upon him, and there is
no absolute separation between them; her dowry also has to be looked
after by the husband; and the law also (verse 149) is found to make an
exception in favour of the property of the king, the Vedic scholar, and
women.

The present verse having described the loss of ownership of the owner
who ignores adverse possession, the next verse proceeds to show to whom
the said property passes over.—(147)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 222), which adds the
following explanation:—‘If the rightful owner of a property looks upon
his property being used by another, without his presenting it to him as
a friendly gift, or some such thing,—and does not speak out,
complain,—for ten years, then he is no longer entitled to receive it;
*i.e*., his ownership over it ceases’;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
101),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 65b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.147-148)  
**

*Gautama* (12.37-38).—‘The property of a person who is neither an idiot
nor a minor, having been used by strangers before his eyes for ten
years, comes to belong to him who uses it; but not if it is used by
Vedic Scholars, ascetics or royal officials.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.17)—‘Whatever property belonging to one has been enjoyed
by another person for ten years continuously is lost to the owner.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.24).—‘If a man sees his landed property being enjoyed
by others, and does not complain about it, he loses it after twenty
years of such possession: in the case of other properties, ownership
lapses after only ten years’ adverse possession.’

*Śukranīti* (1.5.443-46).—‘The property which is ceaselessly enjoyed for
sixty years, even without title, cannot be claimed hack by anybody. The
following cannot he destroyed by length of adverse possession: pledge,
boundary-land, minor’s property, trust property, sealed deposit, female
slaves, government property and property of the Vedic Scholar. The owner
who is indifferent to his property and does not complain about
trespasses on his property, cannot, get hack by law-suit that property,
on the expiry of the above period.’

*Nārada* (1.78-80).—‘If a man is foolish enough to allow his goods to he
enjoyed by strangers in his own eyesight, they shall belong to the
possessor, even in the presence, and during the life-time, of the
rightful owner. Whatever the owner looking on quietly suffers to be
enjoyed by strangers for ten years, though he is present, that cannot be
recovered by him. If he is neither an idiot nor a minor, and the
enjoyment takes place before his eyes, his right to it is extinct by
law, and the possessor is allowed to keep it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (9.7, 9, 10).—‘He, whose possession has been continuous from
the time of occupation, and has never been interrupted for a period of
thirty years, cannot he deprived of such property. He who does not raise
a protest when a stranger is giving away his landed property in his
sight, cannot again recover that estate, even though he he possessed of
a written title to it. Possession held by three generations produces
ownership for strangers, no doubt, when they are related to one another
in the degree of a *Sapiṇḍa*: it does not stand good in the case of
*Sakulyas*.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 632).—‘If the landed property of a man has been
enjoyed by others for twenty years, his ownership to it is not
restored.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रीतिरहितं यति किंचिद् ॥ ८.१४६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

147	(But in general) whatever (chattel) an owner sees enjoyed by others during ten years, while, though present, he says nothing, that (chattel) he shall not recover.
</details>
