+++
title = "153 नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One shall not pay or receive an interest beyond the annual, or what is unapproved (or unaccumulated); nor compound interest, nor periodical interest, nor that which is (privately) stipulated, nor corporeal.—(153)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

संवत्सरे भवा **सांवत्सरी** । ताम्[^३३९] **अति**क्रान्ता **सांवत्सरी** । भवप्रत्ययार्थः सामर्थ्याद् अन्तर्भूतः । अथ वा संवत्सरम् अतिक्रान्ता **अतिसंवत्सरेति** प्राप्ते वृद्धीकारौ छन्दस्तुल्यत्वात् कर्तव्यौ । 


[^३३९]:
     M G omit: tām

येषां वृद्धिर् अनन्तप्रक्रान्तपञ्चकं[^३४०] शतं सर्ववर्णविषया सा संवत्सरं यावद् ग्रहीतव्या, नातीते संवत्सरे । अथ वा यावत् संवत्सरम् । संवत्सरो वर्षः । तावद्[^३४१] वृद्धिर् न मार्गिणीया[^३४२] । अधमर्णेनापि संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं न विलंबितव्यम् ।   

**विनिर्हरेद्** विनिष्कृष्य स्वधनाद् आरभ्योपनयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । अर्वाग् अपि संवत्सराद् या दीयते साप्य् अतिक्रान्तसंवत्सरैव । 


- अथ वा मासाद् आरभ्य संवत्सरस्य यावद् वृद्धिः परिमाणतो निरूपितव्या । मासेन यद् वर्द्धते संवत्सरेण वेत्य् एवं प्रयोगः कर्तव्यः, न तु संवत्सरद्वयस्य लाभार्थी कदाचिच् चिरकालं ग्राहयति किं मे कतिपयमासिकेन[^३४३] लाभेन यदि द्वे वर्षे ततो ऽधिकं वा गृह्णासि, तद्ग्रहणे एषा वेयता कालेन वृद्धिस् तत्रार्वाचीनम् अपि ददद् अधर्मर्णे द्विसांवत्सरीं यथाकालकृतां तदा दाप्येत । "एकां वृद्धिम् अनादेयां न दद्यान् नापि दापयेत्" इति । यथा मासिकी वृद्धिः प्रथमे मासि द्वितीय एवाह्नि शोधयन् दाप्यते तथा यदैवम् अभ्युपैति संवत्सरेण यद् वर्धत इति तदा तथैव दाप्यते, न तु तदधिककालकृता । 


[^३४३]:
     M G: katipayā māsikena; DK: katipayāḥ | māsikena

**न चादृष्टां विनिर्हरेत्** । शास्त्रे या न दृष्टा दशैकादशिकाद्या पञ्चकाद् अधिका न तां गृह्णीयात् । "व्यतिरिक्ता न सिध्यति" (म्ध् ८.१५२) इत्य् अस्यैवायम् अनुवाद इति <u>केचित्</u> । इदं तु युक्तम् । **अदृष्टाम्** अनुपचिताम् इत्य् अर्थः । यावद् बहुभिर् मासैर् न संहतीभूता तावन् न ग्राह्या दिवसवृद्धिर् मासवृद्धिः ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> च "मासस्य वृद्धिं[^३४४] गृह्णीयात्" (म्स्ह् ८.१४२) इत्य् उक्तम् । 


[^३४४]:
     M G: vṛddhir

<u>परिमाणं</u> मासिकं तद्वृद्धेर् न तु ग्रहणम् ।   
**चक्रवृद्धिः कालवृद्धिः कारिका कायिका च या**, ताम् अपि न **विनिर्हरेद्** इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । नैवादद्याद् इति[^३४५] । यद्य् अप्य् अधमर्णस्य[^३४६] प्रतिषेधस् तथापि सामर्थ्याद् उत्तमर्णस्यैव द्रष्टव्यः । अधमर्णो ह्य् आर्तः किं न करोति । अथ वा विनिर्हारो ग्रहणम् एव । तेनोत्तमर्णस्यैव शाब्दः प्रतिषेधः ।



[^३४६]:
     M G: yasyādhamarṇasya


[^३४५]:
     M G DK omit: iti

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> च द्विकादिवृद्धिविधानाच् चक्रवृद्ध्यादीनान् प्राप्तिर् एव नास्ति । किं प्रतिषेधानुषङ्गेण ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">उच्यते</u> । अप्राप्तः प्रतिषेधः पाक्षिकीं वृद्धिम् अनुमापयति । यथाधाने न ब्रह्मसामाभिगायेद् इत्य् अविहितं सामगानं प्रतिषेधेनास्तीति ज्ञापयति । तेनैता अपि प्रतिषेधद्वारेणाभ्यनुज्ञायन्ते । केषांचिद् दूरव्यवहारिणां[^३४७] चक्रवृद्ध्यादयो ऽपि भवन्ति । तेन स्थलपथवारिपथिका वणिजो यथोक्तम्-


[^३४७]:
     M G J: ūnavya-

- कान्तारगास् तु दशकं सामुद्रा विंशकं शतम् ।

- दद्युर् वा स्वकृतां वृद्धिं सर्वे सर्वासु जातिषु ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.४१)

कान्तारगादीनाम् एव स्वकृता सर्वजातिविषया साधारणी वृद्धिर् न त्व् अन्येषाम् । तत्र चक्रवृद्धिः स्मृत्यन्तरे पठिता- "वृद्धेर् वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्धिः" (न्स्म् १.८९) ।

<u>अन्ये तु</u> चक्रवद्यानं गन्त्र्यादि,[^३४८] तद्वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्धिः । तेषां यस्मिन्न् अहनि चक्रं वर्तते तत्रैव वृद्धिः । यदा तु नदीसंतारे दुर्दिनादिना अप्रयाणं तदा नास्ति वृद्धिः । एवम् अन्येषाम् अपि बलीवर्दादिवाह्यप्रयोक्तॄणाम् ईदृशी वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्दिर् उच्यते ।  
**कालवृद्धिः** "प्रतिमासं तु कालिका" (च्ड़्। न्स्म् १.८८) । मासग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । यानुपचिता वृद्धिर् दिवसे दिवसे गृह्यते मासि मासि वा यस्याः कालो न प्रतीक्ष्यते अथ चैतस्मिन् काले यदि न[^३४९] ददासि तदा द्विगुणीभवति धनम् इत्य् एकरूपा कालवृद्धिः ।   

**कारिता** । इत्थंकृतां यावती वा परस्परोपकारापेक्षयोत्तमर्णाधर्मर्णौ कुरुतः । एषापि दिग्भागवणिजाम् एव । अन्येषां तु "व्यतिरिक्ता न सिध्यति" इत्य् उक्तम्, "पञ्चकं शतम् अर्हति" (म्ध् ८.१५२) इति । 

- अथ वा[^३५०] हिरण्ये प्रयुक्ते वासांसि वृद्ध्या गृह्यन्ते, तत्राधिलक्षणं द्रव्यम्, सा **कारिता,** यथाभोगलाभे न्यासरूपविषये च स्यात् । 


[^३५०]:
     M G omit: atha vā

**कायिका** कायकर्मणा संशोध्या । कायजीविका च, एषां क्रमेण क्रमेलकादिजीविनाम्[^३५१] ॥ ८.१५३ ॥


[^३५१]:
     M G J: kācaivādhikādīnām
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sāmvatsarī*’—*means* ‘*pertaining to the samvatsara*,’ ‘*annual*’;
what is in excess of this ‘*is atisāmvatsarī*,’ ‘*beyond the annual*’;
the idea of *pertinence* being implied by the nominal affix. Or we may
first form the compound ‘*atisamvatsara*’ in the sense of ‘beyond the
year,’ and then have the vowel-changes, giving the form
‘*atisāmvatsarī*.’

The interest that has been sanctioned in connection with all castes,—at
the rate of 5 per cent, shall be realised for one year, and after the
lapse of the year. Or, the meaning may be that no interest shall be
realised during the year,—and after the year the debtor shall not delay
the payment of interest.

‘*Nirharet*,’ ‘*shall pay*,’—*i.e*., taking out of his own stock, offer
to the creditor; what is paid before the year has expired would also be
‘*beyond* *the* *annual*.’

Or, the meaning may be that at the time of the transaction itself, it
shall be determined whether the interest shall be computed monthly or
yearly. It would not be right for a man desirous of earning interest for
two years, to make the other party accept the loan for that long period
the idea in his mind being—‘what would be the use of earning the
interest for a few months only?—if the principal is allowed to remain
with him for two years, then I shall earn a decent interest.’ In such a
case the man would so arrange the advance to the debtor that the
interest would be paid after two years. That such a course would not be
right is clearly indicated by such texts as—‘one shall neither pay, nor
cause another to pay, interest in such a single instalment as may be
beyond the power of the man to pay.’ In the case of interest payable
monthly, the debtor is made to pay the interest on the second day after
the lapse of the month; similarly when the stipulation is that the
interest shall be paid yearly, it should be paid on the second day after
the lapse of the year,—and not computed by any longer time.

Nor shall he receive what is ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ ‘unapproved’;—*i.e*., a rate not
sanctioned by the scriptures;—*i.e*., rates above 5 per cent., such as
10 per cent., or 11 per cent.

Some people hold that this is only a reiteration of what has been said
(under 152) that ‘an excessive rate of interest is not payable.’

The right explanation of ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ therefore is ‘*unaccumulated*’;—the
meaning being that interest shall not be received by the clay, or by the
month, until it has accumulated during several months.

“But under 142 it has been declared that one may take ‘monthly
interest.’”

What is meant by that is that the interest shall he computed by the
month, and not that it shall be received month by month.

‘*Compound interest*’:—the various kinds of interest from here down to
the ‘*corporeal*,’ should be construed with ‘*he shall not pay*.’ Though
the prohibition is literally addressed to the debtor, yet it is really
meant to be addressed to the creditor; for the debtor, being in
distress,—what is there that he may not do?

Or, what is directly meant by ‘*nirharet*’ is *receiving* itself; so
that the prohibition would he addressed literally to the creditor
directly.

“In as much as the rates of interest have been fixed at 2, 3, 4 or 5 per
cent, there is no possibility of ‘compound interest’ being paid or
received: what then is the need of the present prohibition?”

Our answer is as follows:—This prohibition itself is indicative of the
fact that it is open to the creditor to charge such interest also. Just
as the prohibition that ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not sing Sāman during
Fire-laying’ is indicative of the fact that though no such Sama-singing
is actually prescribed in connection with Fire-laying, yet it is open to
the priest to do it. Thus the possibility of the various kinds of
interest here mentioned being charged is indicated by this prohibition
itself. For instance, in the case of men carrying on inferior kinds of
business, the ‘compound’ and other interests are actually paid; it is
thus that in connection with traders on land and water, etc., varying
rates of interest have been prescribed: ‘Those trading in forests should
pay ten per cent., those on the sea twenty per cent.; or among all
castes people may pay any interest that has been stipulated among
themselves’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 38). ‘Interest stipulated among
themselves’ has thus been sanctioned by this other Smṛti-text among all
castes, in relation to only those that trade in the forest, etc.; so
that ‘compound interest’ is not permissible in other eases.

Interest charged on interest is called ‘*compound interest*,’
‘*cakravṛddhi*.’ Others however explain the term ‘*cakravṛddhi*’ as
‘wheel-interest’; that in the case of wheeled conveyances, like the
cart, etc., interest is paid only for those days on which they are used;
and on days when the man has to go by boat, in the crossing of large
rivers, no interest is paid. In the case of oxen and other things that
are used as conveyances, interest is paid in this same manner and it is
this that is called ‘wheel-interest.’

‘*Periodical interest*’;—“Interest computed month by month is called
‘periodical’”—says a text. But ‘month’ is mentioned only by way of
illustration; what is meant is that interest which is not allowed to
accumulate, being realised day by day, or month by month, and no time is
allowed. Another kind of ‘periodical interest’ is that in which the
creditor has stipulated—‘if you do not pay the interest at such and such
a time, my principal shall become doubled.’

‘*Privately stipulated*’;—when the creditor and the debtor tlx upon a
special rate of interest, in view of each other’s requirements. This
also is possible only in the case of distant traders. As for others, it
has been declared—‘successive interest is not payable’ and ‘he is
entitled to only 5 per cent.’

Or, when what is lent is *gold*, and what is received in interest is
*cloth*—whose real character is that of a *deposit*,—it is a case of
‘*privately stipulated*’ interest; and this would have the character of
usufruct, in the case of what has not been kept as a pledge.

‘*Corporeal*’—payable by bodily labour. This would be possible only in
the case of labourers...... (?)—(153)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘A creditor may take, for the term of a year, interest which has been
settled by the following agreement—“when one, two or three months have
passed, the interest on the capital shall be calculated and paid to me
at one time”; but he shall not take the interest according to the
agreement, if the year has passed’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘If the
creditor does not take the money due for two or three years, and the
debtor pays then, the creditor shall not take more interest than for one
year’ (Govindarāja).

‘*Adrṣṭam*’—‘Not found (in the *Śāstras*)’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘not accumulated by the lapse of several months’
(Medhātithi, alternatively and Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Kālavṛddhiḥ*’—‘Periodical (*i.e*., monthly) interest’ (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka, who is not rightly represented by
Buhler).—See Nārada —‘*Pratimāsam bhavantī yā vṛddhiḥ sā kālikā sṛmtā*
(*smṛta*?)’ (‘*kālikā*’ being the technical name for *monthly interest*,
*kālavṛddhiḥ*).

‘*Kāyikā*’—‘To be paid by bodily labour’ (Medhātithi),—or ‘by the use of
a pledged animal or slave’ (Medhātithi, alternative, Kullūka,
Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 9), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Atisāṃvatsarī*’ is that which has gone beyond a year.
The meaning is that if the creditor, suspecting an early repayment of
the loan, should stipulate that the loan must continue for a certain
time, then he cannot stipulate for more than a year. Halāyudha, however
holds the meaning to be that however much be the eagerness of the
creditor to earn much interest, he should receive payment before one
year passes, and not beyond that.—Nor should he receive an interest that
is ‘*adṛṣtā*,’ ‘not permitted by the scriptures.’—There are four kinds
of interest not permitted,—*cakravṛddhi*, *kālavṛddhi*, *kāritā* and
*kāyikā*; these he should not take.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 229);—in *Vīdhanapārijāta* (II, p.
252);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, 36a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (67b),
which adds the explanation.—‘The interest is to be calculated from the
first month upto the end of the year, and not beyond that.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.30, 34-35).—‘Some declare that the said rates of interest
should not be paid longer than a year. The following are the special
forms of interest:—Compound interest, Periodical interest, Stipulated
interest, Corporal interest, Daily interest and interest in the shape of
using the pledge.’

*Nārada* (l.102-104)—‘Interest has been declared in lawbooks to be of
four kinds:—Periodical, Stipulated, *Kāyikā*, and Compound. That which
runs by the month is Periodical interest; that promised by the debtor
himself is Stipulated interest; interest at the rate of one Paṇa and a
quarter, paid regularly without diminishing the principal, is denoted
*Kāyikā* interest; interest upon interest is called Compound interest.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.4-12).—‘Interest has been declared by some to be of four
kinds; by others, of five kinds; and by others again, of six kinds.
*Kāyikā*, *Kālikā*, *Cakravṛddhi*, *Kāritā*, *Śikhāvṛddhi*, and
*Bhogalābha*. *Kāyikā* interest is in the form of bodily labour;
*Kālikā* is what is due every month; *Cakravṛddhi* is interest on
interest; *Kāritā* is interest promised by the debtor; when interest is
received every day, it is called *Śikhāvṛddhi*; because it grows
constantly like *hair*, except on the loss of the head, that is, the
payment of the principal. The use of a mortgaged house, or the produce
of a field, is termed *Bhogalābha*. *Sikhā* interest, *Kāyikā* interest
and *Bhogalābha* interest shall be realised by the creditor so long as
the principal remains unpaid. But the use of a pledge after twice the
principal has been realised, compound interest, and the exaction of the
interest and the principal together are usury and are reprehensible.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.638).—‘Creditors take away people’s wealth by the
compound rate of interest; so the King should protect the people from
them.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **नातिसांवत्सरीं वृद्धिं**

**नातिसांवत्सरीं वृद्धिं** गृह्णीयात्, यदि वृद्धिमहत्त्वात् संवत्सर एव तद्धनं द्विगुणीभवति । अन्यथा तु परस्ताद् अपि संवत्सरस्य गृह्णीयात् यावत् तद्द्वैगुण्यम् । तथा च गौतमः- "चिरस्थाने द्वैगुण्यं प्रयोगस्य" इति । अन्ये तु लब्धीम् अपि वृद्धिम् अशीतिपञ्चाशद्भागलक्षणां नातिवत्सरीं मन्यन्ते, धर्म[विरोधात् त]स्याः ।

> **न चादृष्टाम् [पुनर्] **

शास्त्रैः स्वयंकल्पितां द्विकादिवृद्धिभ्यो ऽन्याम्

> **हरेत् ।**

अथ वादृष्टाम् अनुपचिताम् इत्य् अर्थः । प्रतिमासं न गृह्णीयात्, प्रतिमासोपजातांस् तु तावत् गृह्णीयात् यावद् द्वैगुण्यम् ।

> **[चक्रवृद्धिः कालवृद्धिः कारिता कायिका च या]  ॥ ८.१५२ ॥**

परस्परोपकारापेक्षया स्वयं कृता वृद्धिकल्पाभ्यनुज्ञायते चक्रवद् यानसंयुक्ता वृद्धिश् **चक्रवृद्धिः** । अथ वा चक्रवद् आवर्तते । प्रतिमासं या [वर्धते सा । कालवृद्धिः] काल्[आन्तरे ऽस्]यैतद् धनं वर्धते, न संप्रत्येव । एतच् च प्रीत्या कल्प्यते, स्वयम् अनुग्राह्यतया परस्य । अथ वा अस्मिन् काले अप्रयच्छतस् तथैव [वर्धते यथानिश्चितं] स्वयम् एव प्रयोक्त्रा गृहीत्रा च देशकालकार्यावस्थापेक्षया । इयं चाभिहितापवादकृतानुसाराद् अधिकेति । **कायिका** कायिककर्मसंशोध्या ॥ ८.१५२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

153	Let him not take interest beyond the year, nor such as is unapproved, nor compound interest, periodical interest, stipulated interest, and corporal interest.
</details>
