+++
title = "154 ऋणन् दातुम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, unable to repay the debt, wishes to renew the contract, shall change the bond, after paying the accrued interest.—(154)


If by lapse of time the debtor becomes bereft of the capacity to pay, he should be made to pay the debt according to hit capacity, taking into consideration the time and place and the rate of interest.


atha śaktivihīnaḥ syād ṛṇī kālaviparyayāt | 
śakyaprekṣam ṛṇaṃ dāpyaḥ kāle deśe yathodayam ||
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वृद्धिद्विगुणीभूतम् **ऋणं** धनपरिक्षयाद् **दातुम् अशक्तो यः** **स** **पुनः क्रियाम्** कारयितव्यः । **करणं** लेख्यसाक्ष्यादि परिवर्तयितव्यः । **वृद्धिं** तु दद्यात् **निर्जिताम्**, यावती गणनया भवतीत्य् अर्थः । द्विगुणाद् अधिकं न ग्राह्यम् इति यद् उक्तं तस्यायम् अपवादः । नवो[^३५२] ह्य् अयं प्रयोग इति । कुतः पुनः द्वैगुण्यापवादार्थता । यावता नेह किंचिद् ईदृशं वचनम् अस्ति वृद्धिसहितं धनं वर्धते मूलधनं वा । केवलं पुनः क्रिया श्रूयते । सा च **करणं** **परिवर्तयेद्** इति व्याख्यान्तरेण व्याख्याता । 


[^३५२]:
     M G J: jayo

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">यदि</u> न वर्धते किम् अर्थं तर्हि करणपरिवर्तनम् ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">उच्यते</u> । शान्तलाभे धने ऽदीयमाने आलस्यादिसंभावना[^३५३] साक्षिणश् च दीर्घे गच्छति काले विस्मरेयुः । यथोक्तम् ।


[^३५३]:
     M G: yā gantryādisaṃbhāvanā; J: yogakrayādisaṃbhāvanā (we have here three different readings from the three editions; clearly a defective reading here, which the editors attempted to correct)

- यत्र कार्ये भवेद् येन कृतोपेक्षा दशाब्दिकी ।

- विवादस् तत्र नैव स्यात् साहसेषु विशेषतः ॥

तथा "दशवर्षोपेक्षितम् ऋणम् असाध्यम्" (कश् ३.११.१३) इति । तथाच पूर्वे स्म व्याचक्षते । 

- अयं च राज्ञः उपदेशः पीडितस्यानुग्रहः । यदि च द्विगुणस्य नवीकरणेन पुनः प्रयोगो[^३५४] वृद्धिसहितस्य पुनर् वृद्धिर् महांश् च[^३५५] पीडितस्यानुग्रहः । अथ सर्वं तदानीम् अवष्टभ्य न दाप्यते, एषो ऽनुग्रहो निर्धनस्य । ईदृशो ऽनुग्रहो दैवेनैव कृतः । तथा च सर्वस्मृतिष्व् अस्याम् अवस्थायां विहितम् ।


[^३५५]:
     M G: mahāśa; J: mahān ayaṃ


[^३५४]:
     M G: prayoge

- अथ शक्तिविहीनः स्याद् ऋणी कालविपर्ययात् ।

- प्रेक्ष्य शक्तिम्[^३५६] ऋणं दाप्यः काले देशे यथोदयम् ॥


[^३५६]:
     M G: prekṣyaś ca tam; DK: prekṣya ca tam

यद्य् अधमर्णो दैवदोषान् निर्धनीभूतस् तदा न दुर्गावरोधादिना राज्ञा पीडयितव्यः । किं तर्हि कर्तव्यम् । यदास्य कथंचिद् धनं भवेत् तदा यथासंभवं शनैः शनैर् दापयितव्यः । "प्रेक्ष्य शक्तिम्" धनवत्तां[^३५७] ज्ञात्वेत्य् अर्थः । दाप्य्ः उचितस्य । वक्ष्यति "कर्मणापि समं कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । तस्मात् कारणपरिवृत्तौ[^३५८] यद् एवोक्तम् अस्माभिस् तद् एव प्रयोजनम् ॥ ८.१५४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If a man, having his wealth reduced, is unable to pay the doubled
principal, he should be made to renew the contract, and to ‘*change*
*the deed*’—*i.e*., the document properly attested. But he should pay
the interest that has already accrued.

This is an exception to what has been said as to the creditor not
receiving more than double of bis principal;—since the loan-transaction
remains in force.

“How does it follow that there is an exception to the non-exceeding of
the double?”

Because in this case there is nothing to show whether further interest
accrues upon the principal along with the accrued interest, or upon the
principal only; all that is mentioned is the ‘renewal of the contract,’
which is explained in other words—‘he shall *change the bond*.’

“If further interest does not accrue on past interest, for what purpose
should the bond be altered?”

The answer is as follows:—When interest has ceased to accrue, and the
money is not paid, there is every possibility of laxity (on the part of
the debtor), and of the witnesses (of the old document), forgetting all
about the transaction; and a debt thus ignored for ten years would
become non-payable; as has been declared in the following text.—‘Where a
document is ignored for ten years, there can be no suit on its basis;
especially in the case of assaults (?).’

This is how it has been explained by older writers.

The following verse (from Nārada, 131) lays down the favour that the
king may show towards the debtor:

> *If by lapse of time the debtor becomes bereft of the capacity to pay,
> he should be made to pay* *the debt according to hit capacity*,
> *taking into consideration the time and place and the rate of
> interest*.

\[The meaning of this is as follows\]—

If, through evil fate, the debtor becomes reduced to poverty, he shall
not he chastised with imprisonment in the jail and soforth. “What is
there to be done?” Whenever he should happen to have any property at
all, he should be made to repay the debt by small instalments;—this is
what is meant by the phrase ‘*according to his capacity*.’ This is what
is going to be described as—‘the debt should he liquidated even by
bodily labour, etc., etc.’ (8.177.)

In view of this text, the use of altering the bond is just as we have
explained above.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Karaṇa*’—‘Written bond’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘written bond and
witnesses’ (Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 193), which
adds the following explanation:—‘When the time for repayment arrives, if
the debtor, find himself unable to pay the whole amount due—the
principal along with accrued interest,—and the creditor is unwilling to
keep the loan hanging,—and should wish to renew the transaction on the
same terms, he should pay the accrued interest and renew the bond, dated
afresh with the new date.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 72), as laying down one of the
methods of ‘compound interest.’ It adds the following
notes:—‘*Nirjitām*,’ legally due to the creditor; of this accrued
interest he should pay either the whole, or a part only, and add the
remainder to the principal and renew the bond for the total;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 19b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80a), which
explains ‘*nirjitām*’ as ‘determined to have already accrued to the
creditor,’—and ‘*karaṇ* *am parivartayet*’ as ‘should write another
document attested by fresh witnesses’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 104a).

At the end of Adhyāya VIII, Mandlik has printed the following verse with
Medhātithi’s explanation thereupon—

> atha śaktivihīnaḥ syād ṛṇī kālaviparyayāt \|  
> śakyaprekṣam ṛṇaṃ dāpyaḥ kāle deśe yathodayam \|\|

This verse, though commented upon by Medhātithi, has been omitted by all
other commentators.

It is found in Nārada (131.) It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 71)
as from Nārada; it explains ‘*Śaktivihīnaḥ*’ as ‘without ability to
repay the debt,’ and ‘*kālaviparyayāt*’ as ‘on account of famine and so
forth.’

The verse is not Manu’s, it is Nārada’s; and it has been only quoted by
Medhātithi and explained by him in course of his comment on verse 159.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.154-155)  
**

*Nārada* (1.131, 134).—‘When a debtor has been disabled by a reverse of
fortune (from paying the debt), he shall be made to discharge the debt
gradually, according to bis means, as he happens to gain wealth. If the
debtor, owing to a calamity, has not means sufficient to discharge the
whole debt, the claim of the creditor shall be entered in a legal
document, specifying the caste (of the parties), their names and names
of their neighbours.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.47, 60).—‘A loan shall be restored on demand, if no time
has been fixed; or on the expiry of the time, if time has been fixed; or
when interest ceases. When the time fixed for payment has elapsed, and
the interest has ceased, the creditor may either recover his loan or
cause a new bond to be written in the form of compound interest.’

*Bhāradvāja* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyava., p. 193).—‘If the debtor has no
money to repay the debt, he shall liquidate it by giving grains, gold,
or cattle, or clothes, slaves or conveyances.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मूलहिरण्यस्य पुनः क्रिया न वृद्धेः । कथम् । यो हि गृहीता मूलं वृद्धिं च दातुम् अशक्तः करणं साक्ष्यादि परिवर्तयितुम् इच्छेत्, स पूर्व**निर्जितां** **वृद्धिं** दत्वा मूलमात्रस्य **करणं परिवर्तयेत्** । न तत्र वृद्धिम् आरोपयेत् । यच् च दद्यात् तद् वृद्धितः शोधयेत्, न तु मूलतः । अयं च राज्ञ उपदेशः । पीडितस्य वृद्ध्या राज्ञैवाकारयितव्यम् ॥ ८.१५३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

154	He who, unable to pay a debt (at the fixed time), wishes to make a new contract, may renew the agreement, after paying the interest which is due.
</details>
