+++
title = "166 ग्रहीता यदि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the borrower is lost, and the expenditure was incurred by the family, the debt is to be paid by the relatives out of their own property, even though these may have been separated.—(166)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं येन गृहीतम् ऋणं तेन प्रतिदातव्यम् । तदभावे पुत्रपौत्रैस् तदभावे तदृक्थग्राहिणा[^४८८] । न तद्व्यतिरेकेनान्यस्य[^४८९] दानं प्राप्तम् इष्यते । अत्रे क्वचिद् विषये तदर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । येन गृहीतं धनं स चेन् **नष्टो** मृतो देशान्तरं गतो वा — **कुटुम्बे**[^४९०]** च कृतो व्ययः** — **दातव्यं बान्ध्वैस् तद्** भ्रातृतत्पुत्रपितृव्यादिभिः **प्रविभक्तैर्** विभक्तधनैर् अपि **स्वतः** स्वध्नाद् इत्य् अर्थः । यावद् भ्रातरः सह वसन्ति तेषां यद् ऋणम् उपजातं तद् गृहमध्याद् एव दीयते । तच्छिष्टे[^४९१] ऽस्य विभागः । यथोक्तम् ।


[^४९१]:
     M G: tadṛṣṭe; DK: tadṛkthe


[^४९०]:
     M G: kuṭumbena


[^४८९]:
     M G: tattadvyati- (omits na)


[^४८८]:
     M G DK: tadṛkthahārī

- पितृव्येणाविभक्तेन भ्रात्रा वा यद् ऋणं कृतम् ।

- मात्रा वा यत् कुटुम्बार्थं दद्युस् तत् सर्वम् ऋक्थतः[^४९२] ॥ इति ।


[^४९२]:
     M G: ṛkṣita; DK: ṛkthinaḥ

अविभक्तानाम् अन्यतमेन यत् कुटुम्बार्थम् ऋणं कृतं तद् भ्रातृपितृव्यतत्पुत्रादयः सर्वे दद्युर् न त्व् अकुटुम्बार्थम् इत्य् अर्थः । अविभक्तग्रहणात् तेषाम् एव तथाविधम् ऋणं संभवेत् प्रायः । न हि प्रविभक्ताः[^४९३] परकीयकुटुम्बभरणार्थम्[^४९४] ऋणं गृह्णन्तो दृश्यन्ते । अतः[^४९५] **प्रविभक्तैर् अपीत्य्** आह ¦ **अपि**शब्दाद् अविभक्तैश् च । यदि कश्चिद् भ्रातॄणां विभक्तानां स्वकुटुम्बभरणम् अकृत्वा प्रवसेद् इतरश् च महासत्वतया तदीयं कुटुम्भं बिभृयात्, तत्र विभकेनापि भ्रात्रा पितृव्येण वा यद् ऋणं कृतं तद् इतरो दद्याद् एव देशान्तरागतः ॥ ८.१६६ ॥


[^४९५]:
     M G DK omit: ataḥ


[^४९४]:
     M G: -karaṇārtham


[^४९३]:
     M G: pravibhaktāt
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared that the debt is to be repaid by the man by whom it
was contracted, and in his absence by his son or grandson, and in the
absence of those hitter, by any one who inherits his property; and from
this it would seem that no one else was liable in any circumstances. It
is in view of this that the author adds the present verse.

If the man who contracted the debt is ‘*lost*’—*i.e*., dead or gone
abroad, ‘*and the* *expenditure was incurred by the family*,’—then that
debt ‘*is to be paid by bis relatives*’; *i.e*., by his brother or
nephew or uncle, *etc*.,—‘*even though these may have been
separated*’—*i.e*., had divided their property;—‘*svataḥ*,’ *i.e., out
of their own property*.

The debt that has been contracted by one among several brothers 1ms to
be repaid out of the common household, specially if there has been no
division among them. To this end we have the declaration -¹ The debt
that has been contracted by an unseparated uncle or brother, or by the
mother, for the sake of the family, all this is to be paid out of the
common property, so that from among the undivided members of a family,
if any one has contracted a debt for the sake of the family, it should
be paid by all other members,—brother, uncle, nephew or cousin; but not
so, if the debt contracted was not for the use of the family.’ The term
‘unseparated’ implies that debt for the use of the whole family is
generally contracted only by such persons; for people who have become
separated are never found to be contracting debts for the maintenance of
families other than their own.

‘*Even though these may hare been separated*’;—the term ‘even’ implies
that it has to be paid of course by those who are *not separated*. If it
so happens that from among separated brothers, one goes abroad, without
making any provision for his family, and another, being of a magnanimous
temperament, takes upon himself the burden of maintaining his family
during his absence—then the absentee should, on his return, repay any
debts that his separated brother or uncle may have contracted on behalf
of his family.—(166)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 53), which adds the term
‘*svataḥ*’, which means ‘out of their own property’, and implies that in
a case where even among divided co-sharers, if one has contracted a debt
for the purpose of the maintenance of all co-sharers, and he, for some
reason or other, such as death and so forth, is unable to repay it—then
the debt should be paid by all the other co-sharers.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 647);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 178),
which explains ‘*svātaḥ*’ as ‘from his own property;’—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (76a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 110a), which
says that the explanation given by the ‘Vṛttikāra’ is that ‘when a man
who borrowed the money goes away or dies, and the money was spent by him
for his family, then the debt is to be repaid *even* by such of his
collaterals as may have been living separately from him’,—what to say,
regarding those who might have been living with him. It demurs to this
explanation and quotes the explanation of the ‘Mahābhāṣya’ as that
separated collaterals, like the uncle and so forth, should repay the
debt out of their own property.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.166-167)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.45, 46).—‘Any debt that may have been contracted for
the benefit of the family, on the death or during the absence of the
master of the house, by such members as have not become divided, shall
be paid by all those who inherit the property. But the woman shall not
pay the debt contracted by her husband or son; nor the father, the debt
contracted by the son,—except when the debt is one that has been
contracted for the benefit of the family.’

*Nārada* (1, 2, 3, 10-18).—‘The father being dead, it is incumbent on
the sons to pay his debt, each according to his share, if they are
divided; if they are not divided, the debt must be discharged by that
son who becomes the manager of the family-estate. That debt which has
been contracted by an undivided paternal uncle, brother, or mother, for
the benefit of the household, must be discharged wholly by the heirs. A
father may not pay the debt of his son; but the son must pay the debt
contracted by his father; excepting those that may have been contracted
from love or anger, or for spirituous liquor, games or bailments. Such
debts of a son as have been contracted by him by his father's orders, or
for the maintenance of the family, or in a precarious situation,—must be
paid by the father. What has been spent for the household by a pupil,
apprentice, slave, woman, menial, or agent, must he paid by the head of
the household. When the debtor is dead, and the expense has been
incurred for the benefit of the family, the debt must he paid by his
relations,—even though they he separated from him in interests. The
father, uncle, or eldest brother, having gone abroad, the son (or nephew
or younger brother) is not bound to pay his debt before the lapse of
twenty years. Every single coparcener is liable for debts contracted by
another coparcener, if they were contracted while the coparceners wore
all alive and undivided. But after their death, the son of one is not
hound to pay the debt of another. The wife need not pay the debt
contracted by her husband, nor one contracted by her son, except if it
had been promised by her, or contracted in common with her husband. A
sonless widow, and one enjoined by her dying husband (to pay his debt),
must pay it. Or it may be paid by one who inherits the estate—liability
for debts going with the right of succession. A debt contracted by the
wife shall never hind the husband, unless it had been contracted at a
time when the husband was in distress. Household expenses are
indispensably necessary.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11. 49-52). The father’s debt, on being proved, must he
paid by the sons as if it were their own; the grand-father’s debts must
be paid by his son’s sons, without interest; but the son of the grandson
need not pay it. When a debt has been incurred for the benefit of the
household, by an uncle, brother, son, wife, slave, pupil or dependant,
it must be paid by the head of the family. Sons shall not be made to pay
a debt incurred by their father for wine, for losses at play, for idle
gifts, for promises made under the influence of love or hate, or for
suretyship; nor the balance of a lino or toll. The liability for debts
devolves on the successor to the estate, when the son is involved in
calamity.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.27-39).—‘If he who contracted the debt should die, or become
a renunciate, or remain abroad for twenty years,—that debt shall be
discharged by his sons or grandsons;—but not by remoter descendants
against their will. He who takes the assets of a man, leaving or not
leaving male issue, must pay the sum due by him; and so mush he who has
the care of the widow left by one who had no assets. A woman shall not
be compelled to pay the debt of her husband or son; nor the husband or
the son, the debt of his wife or mother; nor the father, that of his
son. A debt contracted by parceners shall be paid by any one of them
that may be alive; and so shall the debt of the father be paid by any
one of the brothers, before partition; but after partition, they shall
pay severally, according to their shares of the inheritance. A debt
contracted by the wife of a herdsman, wine-distiller, public-dancer,
washer or hunter shall be discharged by the husband.... The house-holder
must pay that debt which may have been contracted by any person, for the
behoof of the family.’

*Katyāyana* (Vivādaratnakara, pp. 50 and 54).—‘If the father is an
invalid, even though alive,—or if he has been away from the country for
twenty years,—the debts contracted by him should be paid by his sons.
The debt contracted by the family, either during illness, or during a
calamity, or in connection with the daughter’s marriage, or a Śrāddha,
should be paid by the head of the family.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतीतार्थ एव श्लोकः ॥ ८.१६५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

166	If the debtor be dead and (the money borrowed) was expended for the family, it must be paid by the relatives out of their own estate even if they are divided.
</details>
