+++
title = "182 साक्ष्य्-अभावे प्रणिधिभिर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When requested to restore the deposit, if the trustee do not restore it to the depositor,—then, on the departure of that depositor, in the event of there being no witnesses, the judge shall actually deposit gold (with the trustee) through spies of proper age and appearance, under some pretexts, and then ask him to restore it.—(181-182)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पदार्थयोजनाम् इदानीम् उपसरामः । **स याच्यः प्राविवाकेन तन्निक्षेप्तुर् संनिधौ** । येन निक्षेप्त्रा[^५८०] रहसि स्थापितं साक्षिष्व् असत्सु तस्य याचमानस्य धारणको यद्य् अपह्नुते "न त्वया किंचिन् निक्षिप्तम्" इति, ततो निक्षेप्त्रा[^५८१] राजा ज्ञापितो न निक्षेपधारिण आकारं दर्शयेत् । किं तर्हि कुर्यात् । **प्रणिधिभिश्** चारैर् हिरण्यम् आत्मीयं सुवर्णं रूप्यं वान्यस्य **संन्यस्य** निक्षिप्य याचितव्यो ऽर्थनीयः द्वितीयं निक्षेपं प्राड्विवाकेन । प्राड्विवाकग्रहणं निर्णयाधिकृतपुरुषोपलक्षणार्थम् । किं साक्षाद् एव याचितव्यः । नेत्य् आह, प्रणिधीनां मुखेन । यैर् एव न्यस्तं **वयोरूपसमन्वितैः** । वयसा समन्विता[^५८२] येन बाला न भवन्ति, तेषां हि परैः प्रेरितानां मद्वञ्चनार्थो न्यास इति संभाव्यते । परिणतवयोभ्यस् तु नाशङ्का[^५८३] भवति । एवं रूपसमन्वयो व्याख्येयः । रूपम् एव कस्यचित् तादृशं भवति यस्य दर्शनाद् एव चापलं प्रतिभाति । तथा च रूपम् एतद् व्याचष्टे "भगवन् वीतरागताम्" इति । तेनैतद्[^५८४] उक्तं भवति- तादृशाः प्रणिधयः कर्तव्या येषां मद्वञ्चनार्थो ऽयम् उपक्रम इति नाशङ्कते धारणकः । **अपदेशैः** सव्याजैर् निक्षेपकारणैः । राज्ञोपद्रवग्रामगमनादिभि- "अनेन हेतुना त्वयि संप्रति निक्षिपाम्" इत्य् अनृतसंभवात् कारणकथनम् अपदेशः । एतच् च सर्वं प्राङ् निक्षेप्तुर् असंनिधौ कर्तव्यम् ॥ ८.१८२ ॥


[^५८४]:
     M G DK: tenaiva tad


[^५८३]:
     M G: nāśako


[^५८२]:
     M G: vayasāmanvitā


[^५८१]:
     M G DK: nikṣeptā


[^५८०]:
     M G DK place nikṣeptrā after sākṣiṣv asatsu
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.181-182)  
**

From what has gone before people might be led to think that in a case
where there are no witnesses, recourse should at once be had to
*ordeals*;—and it is to guard against this that the author adds these
texts.

The meaning is that in the case of non-payment of debt and other
disputes, the judge has recourse to ordeals as soon as it is found that
no witnesses are available;—but this is not what should be done in the
case in question; in such cases the character of the man is tested
through spies. If, on being so tested, it is found that the man does not
trip in his dealings, then he shall not be disgraced With having to
undergo an ordeal. If, on the other hand, he does trip, then it is only
right that he should be suspected of having misappropriated the deposit;
and in this case he should be made to undergo ordeals; because the mere
fact of his having misappropriated one deposit does not necessarily
prove that he had misappropriated another deposit also; for it is just
possible

that on account of some urgent need he might have been led to commit
misappropriation in one case, while in another ease, either by reason of
his needs having been supplied or on account of repentance, he might
have restored it honestly.

The present verses are to be taken as forbidding the course of hurriedly
making the trustee undergo ordeals; and they are meant to point out a
new line of evidence. Then again even though in the case of the man
misappropriating the judge’s deposit, there is immediate punishment, yet
it does not follow that the same punishment shall be inflicted upon him
in connection with the alleged, but uncertain, misappropriation of that
belonging to the plaintiff. For if such penalty were to be inflicted
even in cases of uncertainty, there would be no laws laying down the
means of arriving at *certain* conclusions. Hence it has been considered
necessary that decisions should be arrived at by means of reasonings.

For these reasons verse 181 should not be taken in its literal sense
(that the man *shall be made to pay* ‘*yācyaḥ*’); but it should be
interpreted in a different manner, being construed along with verse 182.

The verbal construction of the verse we explain now as follows:—‘*on the
departure of that depositor*’—by whom the deposit had been placed,—‘he
shall *be asked by the judge to restore it*.’

There being no witnesses,—when the depositor asks for the restoration of
his deposit and the trustee denies the deposit, saying ‘you never
deposited anything with me’—and being appealed to by the depositor, the
king shall not at once put the trustee to the ordeal;—what then shall he
do?—The judge shall deposit his own or some one else’s gold or silver
with the man, through spies, and then ask for its restoration.

The term ‘*judge*,’ here stands for any person who has been deputed by
the king to investigate the ease.

“Is he to be asked directly by the Judge himself?”

No; it should be done through spies,—those same through whom the deposit
has been placed.

‘*Of propet age and appearance*’;—they should he of ‘proper age,’ so
that they may not be minors; for if such minors were to go to transact
business, the man would suspect that they had been put up by others to
cheat him; whereas if they were full-grown people, no such suspicion
would arise.

Similarly they should be of ‘*proper appearance*’;—in the case of some
people their very appearance is indicative of their fickle nature; that
appearance is to be regarded as ‘proper’ which indicates freedom from
love or hatred.

Thus the meaning comes to be that the spies chosen should be such that
the trustee may not suspect that the whole business was a trick to
entrap him.

‘*Under some pretexts*.’—That is, they may say, for instance,—‘The man
who is depositing this good is leaving the city from fear of harrassment
by the king, that is why I am placing this deposit with you.’ This
untrue representation is what is called ‘*pretext*’ here.

All this is to be done, when the original depositor (the original
plaintiff) is not present.—(182)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.181-182)**

These verses are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 664);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 94), which explains them to mean that—‘If the person who calls
himself the Depositor demands the deposit from the person called the
Deposit-holder,—and the latter denies it, saying ‘nothing was deposited
with me’,—and there are no witnesses to the transaction;—then the king,
with a desire to ascertain the facts, should have recourse to the
following stratagem:—Through spies of the proper age and appearance,
trustworthy in word and appearance, he should by some pretext deposit
his own gold with the accusal person;—after some days, he should have
that deposit demanded from him.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.181-184)  
**

*Nārada* (2.4, 7).—‘If the depositary fails to restore the deposit to
the depositor as he ought, he shall be compelled by forcible means, to
restore it, after his guilt has been proved by ordeals or other modes of
proof. The wicked man who does not restore a deposit, on being asked to
do so by the depositor, shall be punished by the King. If the deposit
has been lost, he shall make good its value.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.13).—‘He who, after receiving a deposit, denies the
fact, and is convicted by the evidence of witnesses or ordeal, shall be
compelled to give up the deposit and to pay a fine equal in amount to
the same.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.66).—‘If on the depositor demanding it, the deposit be
not restored, on account of its having been lost, the depositary should
be made to pay to the depositor the value of the deposit, and also a
fine of the same amount.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 664).—‘If after having received a deposit, one
fails to restore it on being asked to do so, he should he punished and
compelled to restore it.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 664).—‘If after having received a deposit,
the depositor refuses to restore it and dishonestly denies the deposit,
he should be arrested and compelled to restore the deposit and also pay
a fine.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यदि तं द्वितीयं निक्षेपं यथा [न्यस्तं प्रतिपद्येत् तदा **न**] **किंचिद्** अस्ति **यत् परैर् अभियुज्यते** ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

182	On failure of witnesses let the (judge) actually deposit gold with that (defendant) under some pretext or other through spies of suitable age and appearance (and afterwards demand it back).
</details>
