+++
title = "198 अवहार्यो भवेच्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a relative, he shall be made to pay the penalty of six hundred; if he is not a relative, nor one having access to him, he shall incur the guilt of theft (specially).—(198)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेण साधुजनकर्तृकासु क्रियासु साक्ष्यादिष्व् अपि अस्वामिक्रियकारिणाम् अनर्हतोक्ता । अनेन **षट्शतो** दण्ड उच्यते । षट्कार्षापणशतानि **अवहार्यो** दापयितव्यो दण्ड्य इति यावत् । **सान्वयः** । अन्वयो ऽनुगमनसंबन्धः । स यस्यास्ति पुत्रभ्रात्रादिः स्वामिनो ऽनुगतः **सान्वयः** । स ह्य् अननुज्ञातो ऽपि विक्रीणानो न स्फुटचोरो यतस् तस्येयं बुद्धिर् मदीयम् एवैतद् यत् पितुर् इति, तं प्रतीयम् अपि संभावना भवति । तस्यैव विक्रीय मूल्यं ददाति । यस् त्व् अत्यन्तासंबन्धः स **निरन्वयः** । **चौरकिल्बिषं** निग्रहं निःसंशयं प्राप्तः । **अनपसरः** । यदि तद्गृहं तस्य नापसृतं भवति तद्**आनपसरश्** चौरवद् दण्ड्यः । यदि तु तद्गृहाद् एव केनचिद् दत्तं विक्रीतं वा तस्य तेन वाज्ञत्वात्[^६२२] तत्प्रतिगृहीतं प्रकाशक्रयेण वा विक्रीतं तदा न चौरवद् दण्ड्यः । **षऋशतम्** एव् दाप्यः । 


[^६२२]:
     M G DK (1: 758): vājñāṃ datvā

अथ वा अन्वयो विक्रीणाति तस्य विक्रेयद्रव्यस्यान्यतः क्रयः **अपसरः** क्रयाद् अन्यः प्रतिग्रहादिर् आगमः । एतद् उक्तं भवति । यदि तेन तन् न कुतश्चन कृईतं नापि प्रतिगृहादिना लब्दं तदा चौरः ॥ ८.१९८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has declared that the man who sells the property of
another person is not fit to be admitted to any transaction done by
gentlemen, such as the giving of evidence and so forth; and the present
verse prescribes for him the penalty of the fine of six hundred. He
shall be made to pay—fined—six hundred coins.

‘*If a relative*,’ ‘*sānvaya*’;—‘*anvaya*’ means *relation*; he who has
some *relationship* is a ‘*relative*,’—such as the son, the wife, the
brother and so forth. If such a relative, even though not actually
permitted to sell, sells a property, he is not quite a thief; for he is
likely to have the idea ‘if it belongs to my father, it is mine’; and in
his case it is likely that he will hand over the sale-proceeds to the
rightful owner.

The man who has absolutely no relationship with the owner is said to be
‘*not a relative*,’ ‘*niranvayaḥ*’; and such a person ‘*incurs the
guilt* *of* *a thief*’—*i.e*., deserves to be punished as such,
undoubtedly. Specially so if he is ‘*not one having access*’; *i.e*., if
he has no free access to the household of the owner, he should certainly
be punished as a thief. If, on the other hand, the property sold by him
has been obtained from the household itself,—having been given or sold
by some one in the house,—and he has received it through ignorance or
folly,—or if he has bought it in an open sale,—then he shall not be
punished as a thief; he shall only be fined six hundred.

Or the term ‘*apasara*,’ ‘*access*,’ may be taken as standing for modes
of acquisition other than *purchase*,—snoh as gift and the like. The
meaning thus is—‘He is to be regarded as a thief, if he has not
purchased it from anyone, nor acquired it through gift or other modes of
acquisition.’—(198)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Avahāryo bhavet*,’ should be fined;—‘*svānvayaḥ*’
(which is its reading for ‘*sānvayaḥ*’) a son or some relation of the
rightful owner;—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ six hundred *paṇas*;—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’ not
related to the rightful owner;—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ means *the removing of
the property from the owner’s house*;—and the man who does this and
sells what belongs to another should be fined six hundred *paṇas*. If
this seller is not a relative of the owner,—and if the removing of the
property from the owner’s house has been done, not by any person related
to the owner, but by the seller himself,—then he should be punished like
a thief. If however the removing has been done by some one else, but the
selling is done by the owner’s relative, then the fine may be even more
than six hundred *paṇas*.—The author of

*Kalpataru* has explained ‘*apasara*’ as the justification for moving
the article from the owner’s possession—such as its being a gift and so
forth *by which property moves away from the owner’s possession*
(*apasarati anena*); and he who has no such justification is
‘*anapasara*’; and this writer adds that this view has the support of
Bhāguri, Medhātithi and the *Vṛttikāra*.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 41) which has the following
notes:—‘*Avahāryaḥ*,’ should be made to give up,—‘*sānvayaḥ*’ belonging
to the family of the owner of the property concerned,—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’
not a member of the owner’s family,—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ ‘who has not
received the property by any equitable method of acquisition, such as
gift and the like’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ he is to be fined 600 *paṇas*;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (85b), which explains ‘*avahāryaḥ*’ as ‘should be made
to pay—‘*sānvayaḥ*’, as ‘along with his brothers and
relatives,’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ *i.e*., 600 *paṇas*.—It goes on to say what
has been quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (above).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.198-199)**

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 95).—‘When the rightful owner has found the article
that he had lost or which had been stolen from him, he shall have the
man in possession of it arrested by the Judge. If the exigencies of time
and place do not permit of this procedure, he may himself arrest the man
and take him to the Judge;—the Judge shall ask the man in possession
—*From where did you obtain this thing*? If the man explains the manner
of his acquisition, but fails to produce the man who had sold it to him,
he should be let off after he has surrendered the property; if the
vendor is produced, the vendor should he made to pay the price obtained
to the purchaser, and also a penalty for theft.’

*Nārada* (7.4, 5).—‘The purchaser must not make a secret of the way in
which he came by a chattel purchased by him. He becomes free from blame
if he can point out the way in which the chattel was acquired by him. In
any other case, he is equally guilty with the vendor and shall suffer
the punishment of a thief. The vendor shall restore the property to the
rightful owner, and shall pay to the purchaser the price for which he
had sold it; besides that, he shall pay a fine to the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.3, 4).—‘When the vendor has been produced and cast in
the suit, the judge shall make him pay the price to the buyer and a fine
to the King, and to restore the property to the owner. When the former
owner comes forward and makes good his claim to the thing sold, the
vendor shall be produced by the purchaser, who thereupon becomes
cleared.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 202).—‘When the purchaser has shown the
person from whom he had purchased the article, he shall not be blamed in
any way; after that, the dispute shall he between that person and the
rightful owner of the lost article.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.168, 169, 170).—‘If one’s property has been sold by
another person, the property shall be restored to him; the purchaser
becomes guilty if he cannot produce the seller; and he shall be dealt
with as a *thief*, if he bought the thing either in secret, or at a very
low price, or at an improper time. If a man comes by his property that
had been lost or stolen, he should have the possessor arrested; or if
the time or place does not permit of this, he shall arrest him himself
and produce him before the court; the man becomes absolved from blame on
producing the seller; and from the seller, the owner recovers his
property,—the purchaser, the price that he had paid, and the King, a
fine.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.11)—‘That should be regarded as *Fraudulent Purchase*
which is made at an unreasonably low price, or in the interior of a
house, or outside of the village, or at night, or in secret, or from a
dishonest person.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अवहार्यो** दण्ड्यः **सान्वयः** सनिःसरः षट्शतं दमम् । **निरन्वयस्** तद् **अनपसरः प्राप्तः स्याच् चोरकिल्बिषम्** इत्य् अनेनापराधमहत्त्वाद् दण्डमहत्त्वं दर्शयति पूर्वस्मात् । अन्यस् त्व् आह- **अपसरः** क्रयाद् अन्यो धनागमः । एवं च सति — ॥ ८.१९७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

198	If the (offender) is a kinsman (of the owner), he shall be fined six hundred panas; if he is not a kinsman, nor has any excuse, he shall be guilty of theft.
</details>
