+++
title = "210 सर्वेषाम् अर्धिनो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From among all, the chief men shall receive half; the next shall receive half of that; the ‘thirders’ the third part and the ‘fourthers’ the fourth part of it.—(210)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सर्वेषाम्** ऋत्विजां ये **मुख्यास्** ते **ऽर्धिनः** । यावती तस्मिन् क्रतौ सामस्त्येन दक्षिणाम्नाता तस्यास् ते ऽर्धिनो ऽर्द्धहराः । सोमयागेषु हि षोडसर्त्विजस् तत्र चत्वारो मुख्या होताध्वर्युर् ब्रह्मोद्गातेति । तेषाम् अर्धं तस्य द्वादशशतं दक्षिणेति ततो ऽर्धं षट्पञ्चाशत्[^३५] । **तदर्धेन**[^३६] अष्टाविंशत्य्**आर्धिनस्** तद्वन्तो **ऽपरे**, येषां ततो ऽनन्तरं वरणम् आम्नातं मैत्रावरुणप्रतिप्रस्थातृब्राह्मणाच्छंसिप्रस्तोतारः[^३७] । **तृतीयिनः**[^३८]** तृतीयांशाः** । अंशशब्दो ऽर्धशब्देन समानार्थो ऽर्धशब्दश् च नावश्यं[^३९] समप्रविभाग एव, किंचिन् न्यूने ऽधिके ऽपि सामीप्येन वर्तते । तेन तृतीयो भागः षट्पञ्चाशतः षोडश गृह्यन्ते । एकैकस्य चतस्रो भवन्ति । समस् तृतीयं[^४०] भागं प्रयच्छन्ति षट्पञ्चाशतस् तृतीयं च होतुर् अच्छावाकः । अध्वर्योर् नेष्टा । ब्रह्मणोऽग्नीत् उद्गातुः प्रतिहर्ता । ये च **पादिनस्** ते चतुर्थं भागं कर्मणः कुर्वन्तीति पादिनः । चतुर्थे च स्थाने मैत्रावरुणस्थानान्ते । **चतुर्थांशाः** । द्वादशसमुदाये पूर्ववत् । एवं "तं शतेन दीक्षयन्ति" इत्य् अत्रापि कॢप्तिः कर्तव्या । "अर्धिनो दीक्षयति, पादिनो दीक्षयति" इत्य् एवमादिभिः शब्दैः । तत्र द्वादशक्रमविधिर् एव । अन्यत्र श्रुतो व्यवहार इहापि तयैव रीत्या कृत इति ॥ ८.२१० ॥


[^४०]:
     M G: samatṛtīyaṃ


[^३९]:
     M G: 'rdhaśabdas tv anāvaśyaṃ


[^३८]:
     M G: tṛtīyena


[^३७]:
     M G: -prastotās


[^३६]:
     M G: tardhino


[^३५]:
     M G: ṣaṭpañcāśan na
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From among the priests, ‘*the chief ones receive half*’; *i.e*., they
receive half of the fee that is prescribed for the rite as a whole.

At the *Soma-sacrifice* there are sixteen priests; of these the chief
ones are four: the *Hotṛ*, the *Adhvaryu*, the *Brahman* and the
*Udgātṛ*, and these receive one half of the total fee;—the total fee
being *one hundred and twelve*, fifty-six go to these four men.

Half of this, that is *twenty-eight*, go to the ‘*next*’; *i.e*., those
four whose appointment comes after that of the four mentioned above;
*i.e*., the *Maitrāvaruṇa*, the *Pratiprasthātṛ*, the *Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin*
and the *Prastotṛ*.

The ‘*thirders*’ receive the ‘*third part*.’—The term ‘part’ here is
synonymous with ‘half’; the term ‘half’ does not always stand for two
equal divisions; it is used also in reference to what is very near such
equal divisions; hence the ‘*third part*’ of ‘*fifty-six*’ is understood
to be *sixteen*; so that each of these four *gets four*.

Some people take the ‘third part’ as such that of the total fee; when
others take it as that of *fifty-six*.

The four ‘thirders’ are—the *Acchāvāka*, associated with the *Hotṛ*, the
*Neṣṭṛ* connected with the *Adhvaryu*, the *Agnīd* with the *Brahman*,
and the *Pratihartṛ* with the *Udgātṛ*.

The ‘*Fourthers*’—*i.e*., so called because they perform the *fourth*
part of the rite, and also because they occupy the fourth place from the
*Maitrāvaruṇa*— receive ‘*the fourth part*’—*i.e*., *twelve*—of the
whole; this number being got at in the same manner as before.

This same method of distribution is to be employed also in the case of
the rite of Initiation, where the fee is laid down as ‘a hundred’; where
also the ‘halfers’ and ‘fourthers’ help in the performance.

The practice, that, we have found prescribed elsewhere we have described
in connection with the present text also.—(210)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The total fee being 112, the shares are 56, 28, 16, 12 (Medhātithi);—the
total being 100, the shares are 48, 24, 16, 12 (Rāghavānanda, Nārāyaṇa
and Kullūka); \[Buhler wrongly puts the last figure as 8\];—the total
fee shall be divided into 25 shares and the several classes shall
receive 12, 6, 4 and 3 respectively.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 118), which adds the
following notes:—At the *Jyotiṣṭoma*, 100 cows have been laid down as
the fee for the 16 priests; and the present rule prescribes what part of
it is to be given to which priest; the four ‘principal’ priests—*e.g*.,
the *Hotṛ*, *Adhvaryu Brahman* and *Udgātṛ*—are ‘*ardhinaḥ*’, *entitled
to one half*; with a view to the total available, this ‘one half must be
understood to be 48; so that 48 cows are to be given to the principal
priests’;—the next class, consisting of the *Maitrāvaruṇa*,
*Pratiprasthātṛ*, *Brāhmaṇacchaṃsi* and *Prastotṛ* are to receive half
of the ‘half-sharers’, *i.e*., 24 cows have to be given to these;—the
next class, consisting of the *Acchāvāka*, *Neṣṭr*, *Agnīdhra* and
*Pratihartṛ*, are entitled to a third part of the ‘half-sharers’; so
that they are to receive 16 cows;—the last class consisting of the
*Grāvastotṛ*, *Netṛ*, *Potṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*, are to receive a quarter
of the ‘half-sharers’; so that these receive 12 cows.—This division, it
adds, his based upon the text ‘*ardhino dīkṣayati*’ which actually names
the priests ‘*ardhinaḥ*,’ ‘half-sharers’, and so forth.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.265), which lays down the same
classification and division as the *Vivādaratnākara*. It raises the
following question:—“This division cannot be acceptable, as we find
neither any convention to the effect, nor is the fee of the nature of
capital jointly raised, nor is there any Vedic text actually prescribing
such shares. So that, under the circumstances, the most equitable
division would be that every one should receive an equal share,
according to the rule laid down in *Mīmāṃsā-sūtra*—‘*Samam syāt
aśrutatvāt*’, ‘it must be equal, as nothing else has been directly
prescribed’; or that each one should receive what is due to him in
consideration of the work actually done by him.”—It answers this
objection as follows:—Unless we accept the division suggested, we cannot
account for the names ‘*ardhinaḥ*’ (half sharers), ‘*Tṛtīyinaḥ*’ (third
sharers), and ‘*Pādinaḥ*’(quarter sharers), which we find in a text in
connection with the *Dvādaśāha* sacrifice, which has the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
for its archetype; these names would be meaningless if they were not
taken as indicating the share of the priests in the sacrificial fee.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 837), which adds that though the first
class of priests gets only 48, which is not quite *half* of *100*, yet
it is very close to it; hence they may be called ‘Half sharers’; it has
the same division as in *Mitākṣarā*.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 739);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (90a),
which adds the following explanation:—‘*Sarveṣām*’, among the sixteen
priests engaged in the sarcrifice, out of the 100 cows, the prescribed
sacrificial fee, one half is to go to the principal priests, *viz*.,
Hotṛ, Brāhmaṇa, Adhvaryu and Udgātṛ; even though they may receive a
little less than the exact one half, they may be called ‘*ardhinaḥ*’,
‘Halfers’; the second set, consisting of the Maitrāvaruṇa,
Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin, Pratiprasthātṛ and Prastotṛ, are entitled to half of
what is received by the former set; the third set, consisting of the
*Acchāvāka*, *Agnīdhra*, *Neṣtṛ* and *Pratihartṛ*, receive the third
part of what is received by the first set;—and the fourth set,
consisting of the *Grāvastut*, *Netṛ*, *Unnetṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*,
receive the fourth part of what is received by the first set.
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"ताञ् छतेन दाक्षयन्ति" इति वचनाद् अष्टचत्वारिंशद् भवन्तीति । एवं तदर्धाद् इव संख्यानिर्देश उत्तरत्र समर्थो भवति । तेन्**आर्धिनो** ऽध्वर्युब्रह्मोद्गातृहोतारो **मुख्या** ऋत्विजो भवन्ति । तदर्धेन चतुर्विंशत्या **अर्धिनो ऽपरे** उक्तेभ्यो द्वितीयस्थानं प्रतिप्रस्थातृमैत्रावरुणब्राह्मणाच्छंसिप्रस्तोतारः । एवं च कात्यायनः "षत् षत् द्वितीयेभ्यः" वक्ति । **तृतीयिनः** तृतीयं स्थानं येषां त इमे तृतियिनः, तृतीयांशाः । समुदायेन षोडश पशुभाजः । कात्यायनो ऽपि चैवम् एव वक्ति- "चतस्रश् चतस्रस् तृतीयेभ्यः" इति । प्रत्येकं चतुर्थ अंशो येषां त इमे **चतुर्थांशाः** समुदायतो द्वादशपशुभाजः **पादिनो** भवन्ति । कात्यायनो ऽपि "तिस्रस् तिस्र इतरेभ्यः" । आद्यसंख्यापेक्षया पाद एषाम् अस्तीति **पादिनः** । चतुर्थस्थाना उच्यन्ते । स्थाने स्थानिनां व्यपदेशो ऽयम् । **चतुर्थांश**शब्दस् तु भागकल्पकः समासपदेन । तथा चोक्तम्, विपर्ययेण वैतद् व्याख्येयम् । उभवनिर्देशश् चात्र पादपूरणार्थो विज्ञेयः । यद्य् अप्य् अन्यतरस्माद् उभयार्थप्रतीतिः अयं सर्वो विधिर् न्यायश्रुतिसिद्धो दृष्टान्तत्वेनेहोपादीयते । यथा संभूयैकं कर्म सहकुर्वतां दृष्टा गुरुलघुताम् अवक्ष्यानवेक्ष्य वा वचनसामर्थ्याद् विषमांशप्रकॢप्तिः । एवम् — ॥ ८.२०९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

210	The (four) chief priests among all (the sixteen), who are entitled to one half, shall receive a moiety (of the fee), the next (four) one half of that, the set entitled to a third share, one third, and those entitled to a fourth a quarter.
</details>
