+++
title = "212 धर्मार्थं येन"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man gives money, for a pious purpose, to another who asks for it,—if, subsequently, it is not used for that purpose, then, it shall not be given to him.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यः कश्चिद् आह "सान्तानिको ऽहम्, यियक्षुर् वा, देहि मे किंचित्" इति । तस्मै यदि **दत्तं** भवेत्, स च न यजेत न विवाहकर्मणि प्रवर्तेत । तद्धनं द्यूतेन वेश्याभिर् वा क्षपयेद् अन्यत्र वा विनियुञ्जीत वृद्धिलाभकृष्यादौ, न देयं तस्य । तद्दत्तस्य दानप्रतिषेधो नोपपद्यते । अतः प्रत्याहरणीयम् इति वाक्यार्थः । अथ वा दत्तान्तो[^४२] गौणो व्याख्येयः- दत्तं प्रतिश्रुतं न देयम् । तथा च गौतमः- "प्रतिश्रुत्याप्य् अधर्मसंयुक्ताय न दद्यात्" (ग्ध् ५.२३) । किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । उभयम्[^४३] इत्य् आह- दत्तस्य प्रत्याहरणं प्रतिश्रुतस्य वादानम् । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तर उभयं पठितम् । आह हि नारदः- "कर्ताहम् एतत् कर्म" इति उपक्रम्य " यद् दत्तं स्याद् अविज्ञानाद् अदत्तं तद् अपि स्मृतम्" (न्स्म् ४.९–१०) इति । प्रयोजनविशेषोद्देशेन यद् दत्तं तस्मिन्न् अनिर्वर्त्यमाने[^४४] व्यवस्थितम्[^४५] अपि प्रतिग्रहीतुर् गृहाद् आहर्तव्यम् । दानस्योपक्रममात्रं तदानीं समर्पणं समाप्तिस् तु निर्वृत्ते प्रयोजनेति[^४६] नारदस्य मतम् ॥ ८.२१२ ॥


[^४६]:
     M G: nirvartaprayojaneti; J: nirvṛttaprayojaneti


[^४५]:
     M G: svavasthitam


[^४४]:
     M G DK: anivartyamāne


[^४३]:
     M G: upāyam


[^४२]:
     M G DK (1: 795): naṣṭānto; DK in parentheses: (naḥ ktāntaḥ)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

A man comes to the rich man praying—‘I am desirous of marrying for the
sake of issue,’ or ‘I wish to perform such and such a sacrifice,’ ‘give,
me some money’;—and the money is given to him;—but the man does not
marry, and spends the money either in gambling or over prostitutes, or
for something else, laying it out on interest or agriculture,—then ‘*it
shall not be given to him*.’

When the money has been given already, there can be no sense in
forbidding the gift; (A) hence the sentence should be taken to mean that
‘it shall be taken back from him.’ (B) Or the former clause itself may
be taken in a figurative sentence,—the word ‘*gives*’ being taken in the
sense of ‘promises’; the meaning in this case would be that ‘the
promised money shall not be given.’ In this sense we have the assertion
of Gautama (5.23)—‘Even after promising, no money shall be given to one
who is found to be unrighteous.’

“Of these two explanations (A & B), which is the more reasonable?”

Both are reasonable: the taking back of what has been given, and also
not giving what has been promised. In another *Smṛti* -text we find both
these courses laid down:—Beginning with the words—‘I am going to perform
such and such an act,’ the text goes on to say—‘what is given in
ignorance is as good as not given’ *Nārada*, 4.10-11). This means that
when money has been given for a certain act, if that act is not done,
the money, even though paid, shall ho brought back from the receiver’s
house; and the opinion of Nārada is that in this case there was only a
*promise* of the gift, and its fulfilment would be dependent upon the
actual fulfilment of the purpose for which it had been asked for.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kartāhametat karmeti*’—(Medhātithi, p. 1009, l. 5).—The text of Nārada
(4.10-11) is—‘*Kartāhametat karmeti pratilābhecchayā ca yat Apātre
pātramityukte kārye vā dharmasaṃhite Yaddattam syādavijñānādadattam
tadapi smṛtam*.’

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 137), which explains the
meaning to be—‘If the man begs money for the performance of a pious act,
but having got it, he does not do the act, then the gift should be
recovered from him.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 348), to the effect that when
money has been given to a Brāhmaṇa who has begged it for the purpose of
performing a sacrifice or some such act,—but he does not do such an
act,—then the money is to be taken back from him;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (94a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Ārthaśāstra* (6.94).—‘In some cases the resumption of a gift is
permitted; if one has given away his entire property, or his wife and
son, or his own self, it should be restored to him; if a gift has been
promised to a certain person under the impression that he is deserving
of it, it may be resumed on his being found to be undeserving; u (?) if
a gift was promised to a man for the purpose of helping him in the
carrying on of such meritorious work as the tending of cows and the
like, it may be resumed if he is found to be using it in stealing,
adultery and such acts; if it has been promised to a man under the
impression that he has rendered help to the giver, it may be resumed if
the man is found either to have done him no good or to have actually
done him harm; if a gift has been promised by virtue of certain special
qualifications in the recipient, it may be resumed if he is not found to
possess those qualifications. Clever judges shall permit such resumption
of gifts in such a manner as neither the giver nor the recipient may be
hit hard.’

*Nārada* (14.4 *et seq*.).—‘A deposit, a pledge, joint property, a son,
wife, the entire property of one having offspring, and what has been
promised to another man:—these have been declared to be inalienable by
one even in the worst plight...... The price paid for merchandise,
wages, a present offered for amusement, a gift made from affection, or
from gratitude, or for sexual intercourse with a woman, and a respectful
gift,—these are valid gifts. The following are invalid gifts: what has
been given under the influence of fear, anger, hatred, sorrow or pain;
or as a bribe, or in jest, or fraudulently, under false pretences; or by
a child, or by a fool, or by a person not bis own master, or by one
distressed, or by one intoxicated, or by one insane, or in consideration
of a reward, thinking *this man will do me some service*;— and so is
invalid what has been given from ignorance to an unworthy man thought to
be worthy, or for a purpose thought to be virtuous. The donee who covets
invalid gifts and accepts them through avarice,—and the donor of what
ought not to be given,—both deserve punishment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.2, 8-11).—‘That which may not be given is of eight
kinds: joint property, son, wife, pledges, one’s entire property, a
deposit, wealth, what has been borrowed for use and what has been
promised to another. The following eight are recognised as valid
gifts:—wages for pleasure derived, price of merchandise, fee paid to or
for a damsel, present to a benefactor, present through reverence,
kindness or affection. What has been given by one angry or resenting an
injury, or through inadvertence, or by one distressed, or by a junior,
mad man, a terrified person, one intoxicated or overaged, or outcast or
idiot, or one afflicted with grief or illness,—or what is given in
jest;—all these have been declared to be void gifts. When anything has
been given through desire for reward, or to an unworthy person mistaken
for a worthy one, or for an immoral purpose,—the donor may resume the
gift.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākāra, p. 129, p. 132, p. 135).—‘A man may give
away his entire property over and above what may be necessary for the
maintenance of his family, excepting his house. If a man has promised a
gift to a Brāhmaṇa of his own accord, if he refuses to give it he should
he made to pay it, and also pay the first amercement. A man may resume
what he may have given under the influence of love or anger, or when he
was not a free agent, or when he was distressed. Or one made by a
eunuch, an intoxicated person, or under a misapprehension, or in jest.
If a bribe has been promised for some work, it should never be given,
even if the work may be accomplished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-175, 176).—‘With the exception of the wife and son,
everything may he given away, in consonance with the interests of the
family; if a man has offspring, he should not give away his entire
property; nor may he give to one person what has been promised to
another. The acceptance of a gift should he public, specially in the
ease of immovable property; on having given or promised a gift, one
should not resume it.’

*Gautama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 133).—‘Even though he may have promised a
gift, he shall not give it if the recipient is found to be unrighteous.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वनिगदोपवर्णितः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२११ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	Should money be given (or promised) for a pious purpose by one man to another who asks for it, the gift shall be void, if the (money is) afterwards not (used) in the manner (stated).
</details>
