+++
title = "215 भृतो नार्तो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a hireling, without being ill, does not perform the stipulated work, through arrogance,—he should be fined eight ‘Kṛṣṇalas,’ and should not receive his wages.—(215)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उद्दिष्टेन मूल्येनोद्दिष्टं कर्म करोति स इह **भृतो** ऽभिप्रेतः । भृत्यकर्मविशेषेण स्वीकृतो भृतः[^५०] । देहि मे पञ्चरूपकाणि, इदं ते कर्म कर्तास्मीयता कालेन" इत्य् आभाष्य प्रविष्टः, स चेत् कर्म न समापयति, **कृष्णलानि** सौवर्णानि ताम्ररजतयोर् वा कर्मस्वरूपम् अनुबन्धादि च ज्ञात्वा दण्ड्यते । तानि च रूपकाणि वेतनार्थं कल्पितानि न लभेत । यद्य् **अनार्तो दर्पान् न** करोति यथोदितं कर्म । व्याध्यादिनापीडितस्य दर्पाद् अकुर्वतो भृतिहानिर् दण्डनं च । अतः स एवं वक्तुं न लभते- "यावन् मया कर्मांशः कृतस् तदानुरूप्येण देहि" इति । 


[^५०]:
     J: bhṛtyaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ऋत्विजाम्</u> अप्य् एव दण्डं केचिद् इच्छन्ति स्वेच्छया त्यजताम् ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । अत्र हि महान् अनर्थो यजमानस्य सामिकृत्ये यजमाने ऽतो दण्डो महान् अत्र युक्तः । यजमानस्य च यन् नष्टं तद् दापनीयाः । दीक्षोपसद्देवव्रतैः शरीरापचये समुत्थातव्यम् । 

- अन्यो यः शिल्पी कंचन कर्मणि प्रवर्तयति तडागखनने देवस्य गृहकरणे "अहं ते समापयिता प्रवर्तस्व" इति, पश्चाच् चापसरेत् तेन स्वामिनः क्षयव्ययायासाः सर्वे संवोढव्याः, भाण्डवाहवणिग्न्यायेन । एष हि न्यायः कात्यायनेन सर्वत्रातिदिष्टः । भाण्डवाहकदोषेण वणिजो यदि द्रव्यं नश्येत् तद्भाण्डवाहको वहेत् । "यो वान्यः कस्यचित् कर्मणि धनम् आबध्यार्धतो निवर्तेत" इति कात्यायनीये सूत्रे धनम् आबध्यासज्य धनव्ययं करयित्वा यद्य् अर्धकृते निवर्तेत सो ऽपि तद् वहेद् इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । एवं यो ऽपि षाण्मस्यः सांवत्सरो वा यथोपपादककर्मकारी भक्तदासस् तस्याप्य् एष एव न्यायः । आह च नारदः ।

- कर्माकुर्वन् प्रतिश्रुत्य कार्यो दत्वा भृतिं बलात् ।

- भृतिं गृहीत्वाकुर्वाणो द्विगुणं भृतिम् आवहेत् ॥

- काले ऽपूर्णे त्यजन् कर्म भृतिनाशनम् अर्हति ॥ न्स्म् ६.५–६ ॥ ८.२१५ ॥

_अनार्तस्य दण्ड उक्तो भृतिहरणं च । आर्तस्येदानीम् उच्यते ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The man who does a stipulated work for a stipulated amount of wages is
what is meant by the term ‘*hireling*’ here; *i.e*., the man who has
been engaged to do a certain service, and who has agreed to do it within
a definite time, if he is paid ‘five rupees’ (for instance), if such a
person does not finish the work, he should be fined eight ‘*kṛṣṇala*’—of
gold, or of silver, or of copper, in accordance with the nature of the
work and other circumstances; and he should not receive the said
*rupees*, which had been fixed as his wages.

But this applies to a case where the man is not ill, and omits to do the
stipulated work, ‘*through arrogance*.’ That is, the fine and the loss
of wages are to be inflicted only upon the man who is not suffering from
any illness, and who omits to do the work through sheer arrogance; so
that it is not open to the man to retort—‘Pay me an amount commensurate
with the labour already incurred by me.’

Some people hold that this same penalty is to be inflicted upon priests
who leave off their work at their own will.

But this is not right; in the case of a sacrificial performance, the
loss to the sacr ifi cer, caused by the rites being only half-done, is
very great, so that the penalty in this ease should also be heavy; all
that the sacrificer has lost should he made good, and the man should
also compensate for the physical suffering involved in the saerificer
having to repeat, the preliminary rites of the ‘*Dīkṣā*,’ the ‘*Upasad*’
and the ‘*Devavrata*.’

In a case where a mechanic approaches the rich man and urges him to
undertake the digging of a tank, or the building of a temple, with the
promise that he would supervise the work and see that it is completed,
but subsequently slips off, then he should” make good all the loss of
money and energy that his employer may have suffered; and thus according
to the law of the ‘trader and the carrier,’ this law has been propounded
by Kātyāyana as being applicable to all cases: in his *Sutra*, be
says—‘If, through the fault of the carrier, the trader suiters some
loss, it shall be borne by the carrier,—and so also the man who, having
urged a man to invest his money on some undertaking, slinks off, after
the work has been only half-done.’ Here ‘*investing*’ means *applying t*
*he* *money to* *the* *work*; and one who makes the man do this, should
make good the loss; such is the sense of the passage.

The law laid down in the verse applies to the person who is engaged on
fooding only, for six months, or one year, to do a specified work. Says
Nārada—‘If a man does not do the stipulated work, he should be forced to
receive his wages and do it; if he receives the wages, but does not do
the work, he should suffer double the amount received in wages; if he
abandons the work before the end of the stipulated time, he deserves to
lose his wages.’—(215)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṛṣṇala*’—‘Of gold, silver or copper, according to the nature of the
case’ (Medhātithi and Govindarāja); Kullūka also has ‘*suvarṇādi*’,
‘gold and others’, and *not* ‘gold’ only. Buhler has misrepresented him.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā*’ (2.198);—in ‘*Vyavahāramayūkha*’
(p. 92);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 233), which notes that this
is meant for a case where the hired man has left the work half undone;
if he has done more than half, then only the wages have to be withheld
(and there is to be no fine);—in *Aparārka* (p. 797), which notes that
he should not receive the wages of even that part of the work which he
may have done and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (102a), which explains ‘*anārtaḥ*’
as not suffering from any disability imposed either by royal command or
by supernatural causes.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.215-217)  
**

*Āpastamba* (2.28.2-3).—‘A servant in tillage who abandons his work
shall be flogged. The same punishment shall be inflicted on a herdsman
leaving his work.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.153-154).—‘A hired workman who abandons his work before the
term has expired shall pay the whole amount of the stipulated wages to
his employer; and he shall pay 100 *Paṇas* to the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.193-198).—‘If a workman abandons his work after having
received his wages, he shall refund double the amount received by him.
If he abandons it before he has received any wages, he should pay to the
employer the amount of the stipulated wages; but workmen may be allowed
to retain their tools. If the employer has engaged a workman without
settling his wages, he should be made by the King to pay the tenth part
of the profit that he may have made in trade, in cattle or in
agriculture, through the labours of that workman. In a case where the
workman has worked beyond the stipulated time and place,—if this
additional work decreases the profits of the employer, the latter may
give him such wages as he likes for this additional work; but if it has
tended to increase his profits, he shall give more. A man shall be paid
his wages in accordance with the amount of work done: and neither party
shall be stingy (of labour or payment); if the workman is sparing in his
labour, he shall receive only what the employer may give him. In the
case of a carrier, if he destroys the articles he is carrying, through
neglect,—and not through any act of God or of the King—he should be made
to replace it; if the employer puts obstacles in the way of his
starting, he shall pay double the amount of the stipulated wages. If the
carrier abandons the work after he has just started, he should be made
to pay the seventh part of the stipulated wages; the fourth part, if he
abandons it on the way; the whole of it if he abandons it after going
half way of the journey. If the employer dismisses the carrier, he
should be made to pay in the same proportion.’

*Nārada* (5.22).—‘Hired servants are of three kinds: highest, middlemost
and lowest; the wages due for their labour are fixed in proportion to
their skill and to the value of their services.’

Do. (6.2, 3, 5-9).—‘A master shall regularly pay wages to the servant
hired by him, whether it be at the commencement, at the middle, or at
the end of his work, just as he had agreed to do. When the amount of the
wages has not been fixed, the servant of a trader, a herdsman and an
agricultural labourer shall take a tenth part of the profit derived from
the trade, the product of the cows and of the grain respectively. If one
fails to perform such work as he had promised to do, he shall be
compelled to perform it, after first paying him the wages. If he does
not perform it after receiving the wages, he must pay back twice the
amount of the wages received. One who abandons merchandise which he had
agreed to convey to its destination, shall give a sixth part of the
wages. An employer who does not pay the wages that he had agreed to give
shall forfeit those wages together with interest. A merchant who does
not take a conveyance or beasts for draught of burden, after having
hired them, shall be made to pay a fourth part of the hire, and the
whole, if he leaves them half-way. And so shall a earner who fails to
transport the goods entrusted to him forfeit his wages. He shall be
compelled to pay twice the amount of his wages if he raises difficulties
at the time of starting. When the merchandise has been damaged by the
carrier’s fault, he shall have to make good every loss,—not including
such losses as may have been caused by fate (accident) or by the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.8-20).—‘The servant for gain or pay is declared to be of
many sorts; another is servant for a share of the grain...—A servant
engaged for a day, a month, half-month, a six-month, two months, or a
year, must do the work which he promised to do and receive the
stipulated wages. A servant for a share of the grain is of two
kinds—serving either a husbandman or an owner of cattle; ho shall
receive a share of the grain produced, or of the milk; a third or fifth
of the produce shall be given to the cultivator of the soil as his
share. Let that cultivator to whom food and clothing are given take a
fifth part of the crops; and let him who serves in consideration of the
profit take a third part of the grain produced. Should a hired servant
fail in the performance of ever so small a part of his employer’s work,
he forfeits his wages, and may be sued in court for his offence. When a
servant does not perform his work after having received his wages,
though he is able to work,... he shall be compelled to pay twice as much
as his wages as a fine to the King, and to refund the wages to the
employer. he who has promised to do work and does not perform it, shall
he compelled to do so by forcible means even; and if, through obstinacy,
such a servant should still not do it as engaged for, he shall be fined
eight *Kṛṣṇalas*, and his wages shall not he given to him. When a
servant commanded by his employer does any improper act for the benefit
of his employer, the latter shall be held responsible for it. When a
master does not pay wages for the labour stipulated, after the work has
been performed, he shall be compelled by the King to pay it, and a
proportionate fine besides. A man hired for attendance on milch cows
shall receive the whole milk every eighth day.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उत्पन्ने वेतने किंचित्कृतकर्मापि दण्डयितव्यः वेतनं च [न] लभेत, येन दर्पात् कर्मणः प्रक्रान्तस्याकृत्स्नकारी ॥ ८.२१४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

215	A hired (servant or workman) who, without being ill, out of pride fails to perform his work according to the agreement, shall be fined eight krishnalas and no wages shall be paid to him.
</details>
