+++
title = "219 यो ग्राम-देश-सङ्घानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man, after having entered into a compact under oath with a village, a country or a confederation, should break it, through greed,—him the king shall banish from his kingdom.—(219)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

शालासमुदायो **ग्रामः** । तन्निवासिनो मनुष्या गृह्यन्ते । तेषाम् एव संविदः संभवात् । एवं ग्रामसमुदायो **देशः** । **संघ** एकधर्मानुगतानां नानादेशवासिनां नानाजातीयानाम् अपि प्राणिनां समूहः । यथा भिक्षूणां संघो वणिजां संघश् चातुर्विद्यानां संघ इति । ग्रामादीनां यत् कार्यम्, यथा पारग्रामिकैर् ग्रामो नो ऽपहतप्रायः अस्माकीने गोप्रचारे गाश् चारयन्ति उदकं च भित्त्वा नयन्ति । तद् यदि वो मतं तद् अद्य[^५७] एतद् एषां कर्तुं न दद्मे । एवं नः प्रतिबध्नतां[^५८] यदि तैः सह दण्डादण्डिर् भवति राजकुले वा व्यवहारस् तत्र सर्वे वयम् एककार्याः, नो चेद् उपेक्षामाहे" । तत्र ये संविदते, "बाढम्, किम् इति प्राक्तनी ग्रामस्थितिस् तैर् व्यतिक्रम्यते" इति, एवं प्रोत्साह्य विसंवदेद् बलात् तैर् एव सह संगच्छेत स्वेषु वा नाभ्यन्तरः[^५९] स्यात्, स राज्ञा स्वराष्ट्रान् निर्वास्यितव्यो निष्कासयितव्यः । स्वविषये ऽस्य वस्तुं न देयम् । 


[^५९]:
     M G: bāhyābhyantaraḥ


[^५८]:
     M G: prativardhatāṃ; DK (1: 864): pratibandhatāṃ


[^५७]:
     M G: yad yam

एवं वणिङ्मठब्राह्मणादिकार्ये ईदृशे कृतसंइत् तेन नातिक्रमितव्यम् । यत् कार्यं ग्रामाद्युपकारकं शास्त्राचारप्रसिद्धं पुरराष्ट्राविरोधि तत्संविद्व्यतिक्रमे दण्डो ऽयम् ।   

**लोभाद्** इति । स्वेनोपकारगन्धेन परग्रामणीकृतेनास्वातन्त्र्यं **लोभः** । अज्ञानात् तु विसंवादमान्यस्यान्यः[^६०] कल्पः ॥ ८.२१९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Village*’—is a group of households; and the term here stands for the
*inhabitants* of the village; as it is only among *men* that there can
he a compact. Similarly ‘*country*’ is a group of villages.

‘*Confederation*’—a combination formed by persons professing the same
faith or path, even though inhabiting different countries and belonging
to different castes. For instance, there is the ‘confederation of
mendicants,’ the ‘confederation of traders,’ the ‘confederation of
persons learned in the Vedas,’ and so forth.

There are several kinds of business is which inhabitants of villages,
etc., make a combination among themselves. For instance—‘our village is
being encroached upon by the inhabitants of another village,—very
frequently they graze their cattle on our pasture-lands,—they cut our
embankments and carry away water,—if you be all agreed, then we shall
prevent their doing all this,—and when we prevent them, it is possible
that we may come to blows, or may have to appear before the ‘court;—if
we remain combined in all this, then we shall go forward to prevent the
encroachment; otherwise we shall let it be.’ On this compact being
proposed, men may agree to it, saying—‘yes; why should the ancient
privileges of our village be trespassed by them?’ Now, after having thus
entered the compact and encouraged it, if some one were to shirk away
and make common cause with the other party, and become lukewarm towards
his own neighbours,—such a person should be banished by the king from
his kingdom; *i.e*., he should not be allowed to live there any longer.

Similarly, in regard to the business of tradespeople or Brāhmaṇas and
others, when once a man has entered into a compact, he should not break
it.

The penalty here laid down pertains to the breach of compacts relating
to such work as is of public utility, in due accordance with law and
custom, and not detrimental to the interests of the city and kingdom at
large.

‘*Through* *greed*—‘*greed*’ here stands for succumbing to one’s own
selfish interests as served by the inhabitants of the rival village.

For cases of such breach, *through ignorance*, there is another
remedy.—(219)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 253), which
explains ‘*satyena*’ as ‘by swearing’;—in ‘*Mitākṣarā* (2.187), which
adds that this applies to cases where the cause of action is slight;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 182), which adds the following notes:—‘*Grāma*’,
is well-known;—‘*deśa*’ consists of a group of villages, a
district;—‘*saṅgha*’ is a corporation composed of several persons
following one ‘dharma,’ living in different places. It is also quoted in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (107a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 132a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.219-221)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.168).—‘He who violates the established rule shall be
banished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.186-192).—‘If one misappropriates the property of a
corporate body, or breaks the conditions of agreement, the King shall
confiscate his entire property and banish him from the kingdom. What is
declared by the members of the corporation should be obeyed by all
component members; if any of them act contrariwise, he should be fined
the first amercement....... This same rule applies to guilds, trading
companies, corporations of heretics and other corporate bodies.’

*Nārada* (10.2-7).—‘Among heretics, followers of the Veda, guilds,
corporations, troops, assemblages and other associations, the King shall
maintain their usages and customs—whatever be their laws, their duties,
their rules regarding attendance, and the particular inodes of
livelihood prescribed for them, that the

King shall approve of. The King shall prevent them from undertaking such
acts as would be detrimental to the interests, either of their own
associations or of the King himself, or despicable in their very nature.
Mixed assemblages, unlawful wearing of arms and mutual attacks among
these persons shall not be tolerated by the King. Those who cause
dissension among the members of an association, shall undergo punishment
of a specially severe kind.’

*Bṛhaspati* (17.5, 10-16).—‘A compact formed among villages, companies
of artisans, and associations is called an *agreement*; such an
agreement must be observed both in times of distress and for acts of
piety. Two, three or five persons shall be appointed as advisers to the
association; their advice shall be taken by the villagers, companies,
corporations and other fellowships. When a stipulation has been entered
in a document in the form, “The construction of a house or a shed,
temple...... shall be undertaken by us in proportionate shares,”—that is
lawful agreement. Such an agreement must be kept by all. he who fails in
his agreement, though able to perform it, shall be punished with
confiscation of his entire property and by banishment from the town. For
one who has fallen out with his associates, or neglects his duties by
them, a fine is ordained, amounting to six *Niṣkas* of four *Suvarṇas*
each. He who injures the joint stock, or insults a Brāhmaṇa learned in
the three Vedas, or breaks the mutual agreement, shall be banished from
the town. An acrimonious or malicious person, and one who causes
dissension or does violent acts, or who is inimically disposed towards
the company, association or the King, shall be banished instantly from
the town. Whatever is obtained by one man shall belong to all in common;
whether it has been acquired a six-month or a month ago, it shall be
divided in due proportion.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 793-795).—‘One who is addicted to acts of
violence, one who sows dissension among the members of the corporation,
and one who ruins the property of the corporation,—all these should be
extirpated, after being proclaimed as such;—so says Bhṛgu. Whatever has
been acquired for the corporation, belongs to all the members in equal
shares.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 180).—‘Whatever laws may have been
prescribed for associations, the members thereof shall do all acts
according to them, remaining firm in their duties.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मार्थयुक्तेषु प्रयोजनेषु राजकार्याविरोधिषु गोप्रचारोदकरक्षणदेवतायतनप्रतिसंस्करणादिषु ग्रामादीनां या संविद् उत्पद्यते, तत्र व्यभिचारिणं तस्माद् देशाद् राजा निर्वासयेत् ॥ ८.२१८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

219	If a man belonging to a corporation inhabiting a village or a district, after swearing to an agreement, breaks it through avarice, (the king) shall banish him from his realm,
</details>
