+++
title = "222 क्रीत्वा विक्रीय"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, after having bought or sold anything, one should repent of it, he may return or take back that thing within ten days.—(222)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् द्रव्यं प्रचुरक्रयविक्रयं व्यवहारकाले च[^६४] गच्छति न नश्यति मूलतश् च नापचीयते त्रपुताम्रभाण्डादि स्थिरार्घं तादृशस्यानुपभुक्तस्य दशाहमध्ये आदानप्रत्यर्पणे[^६५] । यत् तु विरलक्रेतृकं[^६६] कैश्चिद्[^६७] देवयात्रोत्सवादौ विक्रीयते अनियतार्थं च तस्य तद् अहर् अपरेद्युर् वा । फलकुसुमादौ तु तत्क्षण एवानुशयः । पश्चाद् अपि[^६८] क्रीत्वा यस्यानुशयः "न ममैतद् उपयुज्यते" स दशाहमध्ये दद्यात् । विक्रेता प्रतीपं गृह्णीयात्[^६९] । विक्रेतुर् अनुशये[^७०] "न मया साधु कृतं यद् विक्रीतम्" इति, तदा क्रेता तस्मै प्रतिपादयितव्यः । एकस्थानवासिनां चैष कालः । देशान्तरवासिनां तात्कालिकी प्रतिनिवृत्तिः । 


[^७०]:
     M G DK add: ādadīta


[^६९]:
     J: pratigṛhṇīyāt


[^६८]:
     M G: paścāttrapaḥ; DK (1: 880): paścāttāpaḥ


[^६७]:
     M G: kaścid; J omits: kaiścid


[^६६]:
     M G: viralakrema(?)tṛkaṃ; J: viralakrayavikrayaṃ


[^६५]:
     M G omit: ādānapratyarpaṇe


[^६४]:
     J: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">केचिद्</u> गोभूम्यादिविषयं विधिम् इमम् इच्छन्ति, न वस्त्रादौ ।

- स्मृत्यन्तरे हि वाणिक्पण्ये ऽन्यो विधिर् आम्नायते । एवं नारदः पठति ।

- क्रीत्वा मूल्येन यः पण्यं दुष्क्रीतम् इति मन्यते ।

- विक्रेतुः प्रतिदेयं तत् तस्मिन्न् एवाह्न्य् अविक्षतम् ॥

- द्वितीये ऽहनि ददत् क्रेता मूल्यात् त्र्यंशांसम् आवहेत् ।

- द्विगुणं तत् तृतीये ऽह्नि परतः क्रेतुर् एव तत् ॥ इति[^७१] । (न्स्म् ९.२–३)


[^७१]:
     M G DK place iti after the first verse.

विक्रयार्थं यद् द्रव्यं तत् पण्यं यद् विक्रीय तद् उत्पन्नेन द्रव्यान्तरक्रयादिना पुरुषो व्यवहरति जीविकाधनम् अर्जयितुं तथा पणभूमौ प्रसारितम् अप्रसारितं च भवति वणिजाम्, तत्रेह पण्यग्रहणात् कश्चिद् विशेषो विवक्षितः । इतरथा "क्रीत्वा मूल्येन" इत्य् एतावद् अपेक्ष्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कः</u> पुनर् असौ विशेषः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">उच्यते</u> । यत् क्रीतम् अपि पण्यत्वम् अजहद् वणिग्भिर् विक्रियते[^७२] तर्हि विक्रयार्थम् एव क्रीणन्ति । तेषां वणिजाम् इतरेतरं[^७३] क्रीणतां विक्रीणानां च नारदीयो विधिः, अन्येषां मानव इति <u>केचित्</u> । 


[^७३]:
     M G DK: itaretara-


[^७२]:
     M G: kriyate

किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । पण्यधर्मादेर् व्यवस्था वानुसरणीया । तथा चाश्वानां बलसंचारो हस्तिनाम् अङ्कुशारोहणं विक्रयविभावकम् इत्यादिना व्यवहारस् तेषु पण्येषु सिद्धो भवति । अविक्षितम् अविनष्टम् उपनिध्यादौ वस्त्रादेर् यावन् नात्र नाशस् तावतो मूल्यम् उपनिधात्रे दीयते, द्रव्यं तु गृह्णाति । इह त्व् ईषन्नाशे ऽपि सर्वं मूल्यं देयम् क्रेतुः ॥ ८.२२२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of goods whereof buying and soiling are constantly going on,
which do not deteriorate, either in quantity or in quality or in
price—such, for instance, as vessels of copper, tin and other
metals,—whose value remains constant,—if it has not been brought into
use, it can be returned or taken hack within ten days.

When such things as fruits and flowers, which cannot last long, have
been bought at fairs and such gatherings, the ‘repentance’ should be at
the same moment, or on the same day, or the next.

After that, if the purchaser repents—‘this thing I have bought is of no
use to me,’—then he should return it within ten days. Similarly, if the
repentance is on the part of the seller—‘I have not done well in selling
the thing,’—then the buyer should be made to return it to him.

The period here allowed is for the case of persons inhabiting the same
place. In the case of parties belonging to different places, the
returning must be done at the very time of the purchase.

Some people hold that the rule here laid down pertains to such goods as
cattle, land and the like, and not to clothes and such articles.

In another *Smṛti*, a different rule has been laid down in regard to the
buying and selling. Xārada says as follows:—‘Having bought a merchandise
for a certain price, if one thinks that he has not done well in buying
it, he should return it, unharmed, to the seller, on the same day; if he
return it on the second day, the buyer should suffer the third part of
the price paid; on the third day, he loses the double of the third part,
and on the fourth day the thing must remain with the buyer’—(*Nārada* 9.
2-3).

Anything that is laid out for sale is called ‘merchandise,’ by selling
which the seller gets a price, with which he buys something else, and
thus makes a living for himself. Such an article is spread out in the
market by the trader. Now from the use of this particular term in the
text of Nārada, it is clear that something very special is meant; for,
otherwise, the text quoted would mean the same thing as the foregoing
text—‘Having bought a thing at a certain price, etc.’ (*Nārada* 9.1).

Now the question arises—What is this something special that is meant?

Our answer is as follows:—The rule laid down by Nārada is meant to be
applicable to the case where the article, even after being *bought*,
still continues to remain ‘merchandise,’ in the sense that it is laid
out for sale by the tradesman who bought it from a fellow-trader only
for selling it on his own account—*i.e*., in cases of mutual
transactions among tradesmen themselves; while the rule propounded by
Manu is meant to apply to all other cases. Such is the explanation given
by some people.

Now, what is the right view on this point?

In each individual case, one should act according to the nature of the
article concerned, or according to local usage. Thus it is that we And
such practices as the trying of the pace of a horse, the applying of the
goad to the elephant, the discussion of the nature of sales effected and
so on.

In the text of Nārada quoted above, the term ‘*unharmed*’ means *not
spoilt or destroyed*. In the case of ‘deposits’ in the shape of cloths
and such things, the depositor receives the value of only that part of
it which has been spoilt, and the remnant he takes back all right. While
in the case of ‘*sales*’ even the slightest harm makes the buyer liable
to pay the whole price.—(222)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka, the rule refers to
things which are not easily spoilt, such as land, copper etc., not to
flowers, fruit and the like;—according to Nārāyaṇa, to grain and
seeds.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.177), which adds that this refers
to such things as get spoilt by use,—*e.g*., houses beds, seats etc;—and
*not* to seeds, metals, beasts of burden, gems, slave-girls, milking
animals and slaves, for whom Yājñavalkya prescribes a period of 10, 1,
5, 7, 30, 3 and 15 days respectively. It goes on to add that the
provision here made is applicable to only those cases where the
commodity was purchased without proper examination; in cases where it
has been duly tested and examined before purchase, the transaction
cannot be rescinded.—The verse is quoted again on 2.254.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 831);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 190),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Anuśayaḥ*,’ *desire to withdraw*, or,
as some people hold, *repentance*;—‘*dadyāt*’, *should return*,—*i.e*.
the buyer to the seller;—‘*ādodīta*,’ *should take back*, *i.e*., t he
seller from the buyer;—this refers to such things as are likely to be
spoilt by use, such as houses, fields, conveyances and so forth,—as also
seeds; but not metals, beasts of burden and such other tilings.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 515), which adds that what is stated
here refers to things other than those enumerated by *Yājñavalkya*
(2.177);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 947);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
88);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (108b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.222-223)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.177).—‘Grains should be tested within ten days of
purchase; metals within a day; beasts of burden within five days: gems,
within seven days; female slaves, within a month; milch cattle, within
three days; male slaves, within a fortnight, \[and the sale may be
rescinded within these specified periods\].’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 91).—‘Having sold a commodity, if the vendor fails to
hand it over he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*; except when there is some
defect in the commodity itself, or when some sudden calamity befalls
him, or when the price agreed upon is excessively low, by reason of the
vendor being in a distressed state of mind. Merchants may he granted one
night for reconsidering their purchase; cultivators, three nights;
cattle-tenders, five nights; persons of the mixed and higher castes,
seven nights, in the case of the selling of the means of their
livelihood. In the case of commodities liable to damage by lapse of
time, rescission of sale may he permitted only to such an extent as may
not spoil the commodities concerned. After having made a purchase, if
the buyer refuses to accept the article, he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*,
except when there are defects in the commodity itself, or when some
sudden calamity has befallen him, or when the price agreed upon is
excessively high, paid by him on account of the distressed state of his
mind. Rescission by the buyer also should be permitted in the same
manner as in the case of the vendor.’

*Nārada* (8.4-9).—‘If a man sells property for a certain price, and does
not hand it over to the purchaser, he shall have to pay its produce, if
it is immovable, and the profits arising on it, if it is movable
property. If there has been a fall in the market-value of the article in
question in the interval, the purchaser shall receive the article
itself, and together with it the difference (in point of value). This
rule applies to those who are inhabitants of the same place; but to
those who travel abroad, the profits arising from dealing in foreign
countries shall be made over as well. If the article sold should have
been injured, or destroyed by fire, or carried off, the loss shall be
charged to the seller, because he did not deliver it immediately after
the sale. When a man shows one thing which is faultless but delivers
another thing which has a blemish, ho shall be compelled to pay twice
its value to the purchaser, and an equal amount as fine to the King. So
when a man sells something to one person, and afterwards delivers it to
another person, he shall be compelled to pay twice its value to the
purchaser and a fine to the King. When a purchaser does not accept an
article purchased by himself, which is delivered to him by the vendor,
the vendor commits no wrong in selling it to another person.’

*Nārada* (9.2-6, 16).—‘When a purchaser, after having purchased an
article for a certain price, thinks he has made a foolish bargain, he
may return it to the vendor on the same day, in an undamaged condition.
When the purchaser returns it on the second day, he shall lose a
thirtieth part of the price. He shall lose twice as much on the third
day. After that time, the purchaser must keep it. The purchaser shall
examine an article before purchasing it, in order to find out its good
and bad qualities; that which has been approved by him after close
examination, cannot be returned to the vendor. Milch cattle may be
examined for three days; beasts of burden, for five days; and in the
ease of precious stones, pearls and coral, the period of examination may
extend over seven days. Bipeds shall be examined within a fortnight; a
female within twice that time; all sorts of grain, within ten days; iron
and clothes within a single day...... A merchant who is acquainted with
the qualities of the merchandise he deals in must not annul a purchase
after having once made it; he ought to know all about the profit and
loss on merchandise and its origin.’

*Bṛhaspati* (18.3-6).—‘The examiner shall examine the article himself
and show it to others; when, after examining and approving it, he has
accepted it, he is not at liberty to return it. The foolish man who
sells an article, though acquainted with its defects, shall have to pay
twice its value to the purchaser and a fine of the same amount to the
King. What has been sold by one intoxicated or insane, or at a very low
price, or under the impulse of fear, or by one not his own master, or by
an idiot, shall be relinquished by the purchaser; or it may be recovered
from him by forcible means. Within a certain period, if a defect should
be discovered anywhere in the commodity purchased, it shall he returned
to the vendor and the purchaser shall recover the price.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 191).—‘If a man, after having purchased
an article, refuses to take it,—or if after taking it, does not return
it undamaged,—he shall recover the price paid for it, after paying the
tenth part of it to the vendor. This shall he done within ten days of
the transaction; after that there can he no rescission of the sale.’

Do. (Do., p. 197).—‘If a man, after having purchased a milch cattle or
such things,—but before actual delivery—returns it undamaged, within
time, he should pay to the vendor the tenth part of the price. If he
repents it after he has taken delivery, he should pay the sixth part of
the price.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 198).—‘Grasses, wood, bricks, threads,
grains, wines, liquids, clothes, baser metals and gold, shall he
examined at the time of the transaction only.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अन्तर्दशाहम् आदानप्रत्यर्पणे साम्नेत्य् अयम् अपाठः । येनोर्ध्वम् अपि दशाहात् कः शक्तस् साम्ना दानादाने प्रतिषेद्धुम् । लब्धिमेष्व् अपि द्रव्येषु सामाशक्यं प्रतिषेद्धुम्, किं पुनः कृत्रिमेषु, यत्र कश्चिद् धर्मगतिर् नास्ति । धर्म्येषु तु प्रतिग्रहेषु तदनन्तरनिर्वृत्तत्वाद् धर्मस्य साम्नाप्य् अश्क्यं कृतम् अकृतं कर्तुम् । तत्र प्रत्यर्पणे पुनर्दानं वा कृतं भवेत् परित्यागो वा । यतश् चैतद् एवम् । अत एवं पठितव्य उत्तरश्लोकार्धः- "सो ऽयं दशाहात् तद्द्रव्यं दद्याच् चैवाददीत च" इति । अत्रैवार्थ उत्तरश्लोकार्धपाठो ऽन्यो भवति- "दानादाने दशाहं तु स्याताम् अपि निपातिनि" इति । अथ वा सामग्रहणं दशाहे दण्डनिवृत्त्यर्थम् । अन्तर्दशाहानुशये कथंचिद् विवदतां राजाधिगमे दण्डनिवृत्तिर् यथा स्याद् राजतस् तयोः । तथा च दशाहस्योत्तरत्र तद्विवादे दण्डः श्रूयते ॥ ८.२२१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

222	If anybody in this (world), after buying or selling anything, repent (of his bargain), he may return or take (back) that chattel within ten days.
</details>
