+++
title = "227 पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्रा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The marriage -texts are clearly conducive to ‘wife-hood’; and these are to be recognised by the learned as completed at the ‘seventh-step.’—(227)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दारा** भार्या, तस्या **लक्षणं** निमित्तं विवाहमन्त्राः, तैस् तत्र प्रयुक्तैर् विवाहाख्यः संस्कारो निर्वर्तते । द्विजातीनां पुनर् मन्त्राः । तत्र शूद्रस्य दारप्रसङ्गः, न हि तस्य मन्त्राः सन्ति, मन्त्रवर्जं सर्वान्येतिकर्तव्यतास्ति । अतो विवाहाख्यसंस्कारोपलक्षणं मन्त्राः । **तेषां** मन्त्राणां **निष्ठा** समाप्तिः **सप्तमे पदे विज्ञेया** । लाजाहोमम् अभिनिर्वर्त्य त्रिःप्रदक्षिणम् अग्निम् आवर्त्य सप्तपदानि स्त्री प्रक्रम्यते "एष एकपदी भव" इत्यादि यावत् "सखा सप्तपदी भव" इति । तस्मिन् प्रक्रान्ते कन्यायाः पदे कन्यापितुर् वोढुर् वानुशयो नास्ति । उन्मादवत्य् अपि भार्यैव । न त्याज्या । 

- मैथुनवत्यास् तु नैवासौ विवाहः । सत्य् अपि लाजाहोमादाव् इतिकर्तव्यतास्वरूपे न भार्या सा । अतस् तत्र द्रव्यान्तरवद् अनुशयः । यथा च शूद्रकर्तृकेणाधानेन नाहवनीयो[^७९] भवति, सपिण्डायाश् च कृते ऽप्य् अग्निसंस्करे न[^८०] विवाहस्वरूपत्वम् । तत्र तु प्रसिद्धम्- "संस्कारकरणाद् एकः प्रायश्चित्तीयते पुमान्" । कन्या चान्यस्याप्य् अविवाह्या, वसिष्ठवचनात् । 


[^८०]:
     M G omit: na


[^७९]:
     M G: śūdrakartṛkeṇādhānenāhavanīyo; J: śūdrakartṛkeṇādhānenāhavanīyo na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">यदि</u> प्रजनविघातरोगगृहीताम् ऊढ्वा न त्यजति का तर्हि गतिः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">सत्यधिकारे</u>[^८१] अन्याम् उद्वाहयिष्यति, "सद्यस् त्व् अप्रियवादिनी" (म्ध् ९.८१) इतिवत् । कृते तु जातपुत्रायाम् आधाने यदि क्षयो व्याधिः स्यात् तथापि नैनाम् अधिविन्देद् अधिवेदनिमित्तानां परिगणनात् (म्ध् ९.७७–८५) । तत्रापि यदि "कामतस् तु प्रवृत्तानाम्" (म्ध् ३.१२) इत्य् एतत् प्रयोजकम् इष्यते न निवारयामः । 


[^८१]:
     M G: pratyadhikāre

तेनैव संक्षेपतः कन्यायां धर्मः । यथान्येषां द्रव्याणां दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वम् अपि साम्ना प्रत्यर्पणम्, नैवं कन्यानां कृतविवाहानाम् । शुल्कदेयानां अपि प्राग् विवाहाद् द्रव्यान्तरधर्मः । या तु धर्माय दीयते तस्या नैवानुशय इति वचनात् । तत्रापि "दत्ताम् अपि हरेत् कन्यां ज्यायांश् चेद् वर आव्रजेत्" (य्ध् १.६५) इत्य् अस्त्य् एवापहार आ सप्तमपदात् । सप्तमे तु पदे[^८२] दानानिवृत्तेर् गवादिद्रव्यदानवन् नास्त्य् अपहारः । अथैव केनचित् कस्मैचिद् गवि दत्तायां न तयोर् अन्योन्येच्छयानुशयो दानादाने, दानस्य तदानीम् एव निवृत्तत्वात् । प्रतिगृहीतं चेद् दात्रे पुनः प्रयच्छेत् तद्दानोत्तरम् एव तत् स्यात्, न[^८३] पूर्वदाननिवृत्तिः । एवं सगुणयोः कन्यावरयोर् नान्योन्येच्छया त्यागो ऽस्ति, प्राग् अपि विवाहात् । विवाहे कृते दोषवत्या अपि नास्ति त्यागः कन्यायाः । स्पृष्टमैथुना या कन्यैव न भवति, अतो ऽसौ त्यज्यते, कन्याया यतो विवाहो विहितो विवाहः । विवाहश् चोपयोगस्थानीयः[^८४] । यथा परिभुक्तं वस्त्रम् अन्तर्दशाहम् अपि नैव विक्रेत्रे ऽर्प्यते, तथैव कन्या कृतविवाहा । पुनश् चायम् अर्थो निर्णेष्यते "सकृत् कन्या प्रदीयते" (म्ध् ९.४७) इत्य् अत्रान्तरे ॥ ८.२२७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Wife*’ is *consort*; and ‘wife-hood’ is brought about by the
*mantras*,— which are thus ‘*conducive to*’ it. That is, the sacramental
rite called ‘marriage’ is accomplished by the use of these *mantras*, in
the case of the twice-born castes; it is not so in the case of the
*śūdra*, in whose case no *mantras* are used; though, barring the
*mantras*, all the rest of the procedure is the same. It is in this
sense that the *mantras* are indicative of the sacramental rite of
‘marriage.’

Of these ‘*mantras*,’ the completion, end, is to be ‘*recognised*,’—‘*at
the seventh-step*.’ After the ‘offering of fried grains,’ the bride is
made to go round the fire thrice and then move forward seven steps, the
words addressed to her beginning with the words ‘*ekapadī bhava*’ and
ending with ‘*saptapadī bhava*,’ and when the ‘*seventh step*’ has been
thus taken by the bride, there can be no revoking, either on the part of
the bride’s father or on that of the bridegroom. So that even though she
be insane, she has to betaken as ‘wife,’ and cannot be abandoned.

There can be no such ‘marriage’ of a girl, who has already had sexual
intercourse; and in her case even though the entire procedure, up to the
‘offering of fried grains’ may have been gone through, she does not
become a ‘wife.’ So that in this case, a revoking of the bargain is
possible, just as in the case of any other commodity. Just as the
performance of the rites of ‘fire-laying,’ if done by a Śūdra, cannot
make the fire ‘*āhavanīya*’ (sacrificial),—or as the performance of the
fire-offerings and other details of the marriage-rite does not make it a
regular ‘marriage,’ if the bride happens to bn within
‘*sapiṇḍa-relationship*’ to the bride-groom. In fact these cases are
regarded as transgressions, as is clearly indicated by the following
declaration of Vaśiṣṭha:—‘By reason of having gone through the rites the
man becomes liable to expiation and the bride becomes unfit for being
married to any one else.’

“If a man, after having married a girl suffering from a disease
conducive to sterility, does not abandon her, what would be the remedy?”

If he has the wish and the capacity, he shall marry another girl; just
as in the case of one who has a sharp-tongued wife and whom ‘he shall
give up at once’ (Manu, 9.81).

In a case where, after she has given birth to a son and the man has set
up the lire, the wife happens to be attacked by some wasting
disease,—the husband shall not have her superseded; specially as the
circumstances under which supersession is permissible have been strictly
enumerated (9.77-85). Even then, if some one were to take to another
wife, by reason of the unchaste character of his former wife, we could
not prevent him.

In brief then, the rule relating to girls is that,—even though in the
case of ether commodities, there is rescission, by mutual understanding,
even after ten days,—there can be no such revoking in the case of girls
who have been married. Even in cases where girls are given in return for
prices paid, they are to be treated as other commodity only until
marriage has been performed. While in the case of one who is given away
in a purely religious spirit, there can be no revoking at all; so say
the texts. Though in such cases also, there is revocation,—as declared
by Yājñavalkya (I.65) ‘Even though she has been betrothed, the girl may
be taken back if a better bridegroom present himself,’—but only till the
‘seventh step’ has been taken. Once the ‘seventh step’ has been taken,
the gift cannot be rescinded; and hence there is no revoking in this
case; just as there is none in the case of such gifts as the cow and the
like. When once a cow has been given to a person, the gift cannot he
returned and taken back, oven by mutual understanding; because the act
of *giving* has been already accomplished at the time that the gift was
made. So that when once the gift has been accepted, if it were given
again to the original giver,—then this would only he an entirely
different act of gift, and not the revoking of the former gift.
Similarly in the case where both the bride and the bridegroom are
possessed of the requisite qualifications, there can be no rescission
(of the betrothal), even before the marriage has been performed. While
after the marriage has been performed, there can be no abandonment of
even a defective bride. Though if she happens to be one who has already
had intercourse, and is therefore not a ‘maiden’ at all,—she may be
abandoned; since marriage is enjoined as to be done with a ‘*maiden*.’
Marriage stands on the same footing as *using*; and just as the cloth
that has been used and worn cannot be returned to the seller oven within
ten days, so the maiden also who has been married cannot be abandoned.

This subject we shall deal with again under 9.47.—(227)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 585), to the
effect that ‘marriage’ is accomplished on the reaching of the seventh
step;—and again at p. 836, to the effect that the taking of the ‘seven
steps’ is absolutely essential.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 893), to the effect that the taking of
the seven steps constitutes an essential factor in the sanctificatory
rite of marriage;—again in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 107), to the same
effect;—again at p. 130, where the following notes are added—‘*niṣṭhā*,’
means *completion*, of ‘wife-hood,’—‘*saptame pāde*,’ *i.e*., on the
seven steps being reached by the girl;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
529);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 222);—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 52)
which has the following notes:—‘*Niyatam*’, *i.e*., bringing about
wife-hood, all the other details being mere accessories.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.226-227)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.226].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विवाह्]आर्थे संस्कारे [पाणिग्र]हलक्षणे भवाह् पाणिग्राहणिकाः, तत्कर्मसाधनभूता मन्त्राः । नियतं दारलक्षणं दारोपसंग्रहलक्षणम्, कन्यानाम् एव गृह्यशास्त्रतो नाकन्यानाम् । तथा च दर्शयति- "विवाहे उदगयन आपूर्यमाणपक्षे पुण्याहे, कुमार्याः पाणिं गृह्णीयात् । त्रिषु त्रिषूत्तरादिषु । स्वातौ मृगशिरसि रोहिण्यां वा" इति । पुनश् चैतम् एवार्थं संदर्शयति- "कुमार्या भ्राता शमिपलाशमिश्राल् लाजान् अञ्जलिनाञ्जलाव् आवपति । ताञ् जुहोति सर्ट् हतेन (?) तिष्ठति" इति । यतश् चैतद् एव । अतस् **तेषां निष्ठा तु वुज्ञेया विद्वद्भिः सप्तमे पदे । तेषां** मन्त्राणां पाणिग्रहणप्रयोजनानां **सप्तमे पदे** निष्ठा परिसमाप्तिः । प्रेत्य तस्य कार्यतः प्राप्तव्यस्य सप्तलोकसंस्थस्य जगतः इयत्परिमाणत्वात् । सप्त हि लोका भूरादयः सत्यान्ताः; तान् असौ पदसंख्या संमितांस् तया सह श्रौतस्मार्तैः कर्मभिर् यातुम् इच्छति । तथा च मन्त्रः एतदर्थानुवाद्य् एव भवति- "सखा सप्तपदी भव" इति । एवं च सति, आसप्तभ्यः पदेभ्यः स्पृष्टमैथुनत्वेन विज्ञाता हेया भवति । ऊर्ध्वं तु सप्तमात् पदात् स्पृष्टमैथुनापि सती न परित्याज्या । तस्मान् निष्ठावचनलिङ्गाद् भवति । तथा च सति सहोढकानीनयोः शास्त्रोपदेशः समर्थो भवति । या तु रोगिणी सती धर्मप्रजननयोर् अन्यत्रसमर्था भवति, तां प्रतिगृह्य नोत्सृजेत । न ह तस्या धर्माविरोधे प्रजाविरोधे वा सति पुंसा कर्तव्यतान्यास्ति । अथाप्य् अस्यादृष्टार्थः सप्रयोगः, तथाप्य् असौ प्राग् अग्न्याधेयाद् अन्याम् उद्वाहयिष्यति । या तूभयोर् अपि धर्मप्रजननयोर् समर्था सा विद्यमानयातुल्येति परित्याज्यैव । अयं च कन्याव्यवहारः क्रयविक्रयानुशयसादृश्याद् एतस्मिन्न् अवधाव् उच्यत इति ॥ ८.२२६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

227	The nuptial texts are a certain proof (that a maiden has been made a lawful) wife; but the learned should know that they (and the marriage ceremony are complete with the seventh step (of the bride around the sacred fire).
</details>
