+++
title = "232 नष्टं विनष्टम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The keeper alone should make good what has strayed, or been destroyed by worms, or killed by dogs, or has perished in an unsafe place,—if it was left without human aid.—(232)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**नष्टं** दृष्टिपथाद् अपेतं न ज्ञायते क्व गतम् । **विनष्टं** **कृमिभिः** । आरोहकनामानः कृमयो गवां प्रजनवर्त्मनानुप्रविश्य नाशयन्ति । **श्वभिर् हतम्**[^९८] । प्रदर्शनार्थम् एतत् । तेन गोमायुव्याघ्रादिहतानाम् एषैव स्थितिः । **विषमे** श्वभ्रदरीशिलादिसंकटादौ **मृतं** **। प्रदद्यात् पाल एव** । **हीनं पुरुषकारेण** । पुरुषकारः[^९९] पुरुषव्यापारः । पालस्य तत्र संनिधानात् वृकनिवारणं च दण्डादिना प्रवृत्तिः । तेनापेतम् । यदि व्याप्रियमाणो व्याघ्रादेर् निवारणे नैव समर्थः, सहसैव वोत्पत्य[^१००] कश्चित् पशुर् वेगेन श्वभ्रं गच्छेद् अनुगच्छतापि न शक्यः प्रत्यावर्तयितुम्, न पाले दोषः ॥ ८.२३२ ॥


[^१००]:
     M G: sahasaivotpatya


[^९९]:
     M G omit: puruṣakāraḥ


[^९८]:
     DK (1:908): śvahataṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Strayed*’—the cattle that has disappeared from sight, and one does not
know where it has gone to.

‘*Destroyed by worms*’;—Worms called ‘*ārśaka*’ enter through the
genital organs of the cow and kill it.

‘*Killed by dogs*’;—this is mentioned only by way of illustration; so
that the same rule applies to the case of cattle being killed by
jackals, tigers and other wild animals.

‘*In an unsafe place*’;—such as holes, pits, stony places and so forth.

All this ‘*the keeper shall make good*.’—‘*if it has been left without
human aid*.’—The ‘human aid’ in such cases would consist in remaining
near the cattle and lighting the stick for keeping away wolves and other
animals; and when they are left without all this care. In a case where
the man, himself on the point of death, is unable to scare away the
tiger—or where if the cattle, running fast, happen to fall into a pit,
from which it could not be turned back by the keeper, even when he would
be following it,—no fault can lie with the keeper.—(232)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṛmibhiḥ*’—‘A special kind of worm called *Ārohakas*’ (Medhātithi)
‘snakes and so forth’ (Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 773), which adds that the keeper
is to make good the loss by paying the price of the animal lost;—and
that ‘*nāśa*’ of the animal here meant is its being not found, lost;—in
*Mitākṣarā* (2.164), as describing the loss of cattle through
carelessness;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 173), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Naṣṭam*,’ stolen;—‘*vinaṣṭam*,’ destroyed—by whom?—‘*by
worms*’;—the ‘dog’ stands for other animals also;—‘*viṣame*,’ place
difficult of access; such as the hill-top and so
forth;—‘*puruṣakāreṇa*,’ care and means of rescue adopted by the
keeper;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 81), which has the following
notes:—‘*Naṣṭam*’ stolen by thieves and others,—*i.e*., what became lost
for want proper care on the part of the keeper,—this negligence being
the reason why the man should be made to make good the loss;—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (105a), which says that ‘*śva*’ in ‘*śvahatam*’ stands
for carnivorous animals in general;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
1362), which explains ‘*viṣame*’ as ‘in an inaccessible place,’ and
‘*hīnaṃ puruṣakāreṇa*’ as ‘what has been destroyed for want of that care
which was possible for man to give.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.138).—‘The cowherd shall make good to the owner the value of
the cattle that may have perished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.165).—‘If a cattle is destroyed through the fault of
the cowherd, he shall be fined 13½ *Paṇas* and made to make good the
value of the cattle to the owner.’

*Nārada* (6.13-15).—‘Should the cowherd neither struggle to save the
cow, nor raise a cry, nor announce it to his master, he must make good
the value of the cow to the owner, and pay a fine to the King. The
cowherd shall make good the value of the cow that has strayed, or been
destroyed by worms, or slain by dogs, or met her death by tumbling into
a pit,—if he did not duly exert himself to prevent such accidents.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 171).—‘If a cowherd who has received
wages leaves the cattle in the desolate forest and roams about in the
village, he should be beaten by the King. If a cow under the charge of a
cowherd dies through his fault, he should be punished and made to pay a
fee to the owner of the cow. If however the cow dies at the house of the
owner, through disease or such causes, the owner should he punished and
made to pay the wages of the cowherd.’

*Āpastamba* (2.28.6).—‘If a herdsman who has taken cattle under his
care, allows them to perish, or loses them through his negligence, he
shall make them good to the owners.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

गोपप्रमादेन ॥ ८.२३१ ॥

_अस्यापवादः_ ।
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

232	The herdsman alone shall make good (the loss of a beast) strayed, destroyed by worms, killed by dogs or (by falling) into a pit, if he did not duly exert himself (to prevent it).
</details>
