+++
title = "241 क्षेत्रेष्व् अन्येषु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of other fields, the cattle-keeper should be fined a ‘paṇa’ and a quarter; and in all cases the crop shall be made good to the owner of the field; such is the established rule.—(241)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पथिक्षेत्रग्रामान्तीयेभ्यो **ऽन्यानि क्षेत्राणि,** तद्भक्षणे **सपादपणो** दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> चात्र स्वल्पेन दण्डेन भवितव्यम्, दूरक्षेत्रात् संनिहिते क्षेत्रे । यत्[^११६] तु पन्थानम् अतिक्रम्य क्षेत्रं[^११७] बहिर्ग्रामं[^११८] वा,[^११९] तत्र महान् दण्डो युक्तः । किम् इति गवां पालो गन्तुं तत्र ददाति । 


[^११९]:
     M G DK: ca


[^११८]:
     M G: vāhigrāmaṃ; DK: bahirgrāmakaṃ


[^११७]:
     M G: kṣetriyaṃ


[^११६]:
     M G: yaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">नैष दोषः</u> । यद्य् अत्र महादण्डो नोच्येत तदा प्रत्यहं प्रवेशनिर्गमैर् गवां भक्षयन्तीनां ग्रामान्तरक्षेत्राण्य् उत्सीदेयुः । दण्डात् तु महतो बिभ्यतो यत्नेन रक्षन्ति । अन्यत्र गास्[^१२०] तृणविशेषार्थं[^१२१] कथंचिन् नयतः[^१२२] स्वल्पो दण्डः । 


[^१२२]:
     M G DK: nayati


[^१२१]:
     M G: -ārthā; DK: -ārthe


[^१२०]:
     M G: go

- अत्रापि विपालानां वारणम् एव । 

सर्वत्र क्षेत्रस्वामिनः सदफले देये[^१२३] । कुशलैः च ते[^१२४] परिमाणेन[^१२५] कल्पिते ।   

**क्षेत्रिकस्य**[^१२६] । क्षेत्रम् अस्यास्तीति, व्रीह्यादिताट्टक् । **इति धारणा**, एष निश्चय इत्य् अर्थः । **सर्वत्र**ग्रहणाच् च विपाले ऽपि पशौ क्षेत्रिकस्य सदलाभः[^१२७] । यद्य् अपि **पशु**शब्दः सामान्यशब्दो महिष्यजाव्युष्ट्रगर्दभादिषु वर्तते तथापि स्मृत्यन्तरदर्शनाद् गोष्व् अयं दण्ड इति मन्यते । तथा च गौतमः- "अश्वमहिष्योर् दश[^१२८], अजाविषु द्वौ" (ग्ध् १२.२४–२५) इत्याद्य् अन्यत्र कल्पना ॥ ८.२४१ ॥



[^१२८]:
     M G DK: daśamahiṣīṣv


[^१२७]:
     M G DK: gatalābhaḥ


[^१२६]:
     M G DK omit: kṣetrikasya

_अत्रापवाधः।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of ‘*other fields*’—*i.e*., other than those on the
road-side or near the village;—if the crops are eaten, the fine shall be
a ‘*paṇa and a quarter*.’

“The fine should be a small one, in the case of a field close by, as
compared to that in the cue of one that can be reached after traversing
a long distance, or which is situated outside the village. In the latter
case the punishment should be heavy. For in this case there can be no
excuse for the cattle being allowed to enter the field.”

There is no force in this; if a heavy fine were not inflicted in the
case of fields close by, then every day, when the cattle would be going
out or coming in, they would destroy all the fields near the village;
while if there is a heavy fine imposed, people would be afraid of it and
would take special care to keep them away. In the case of remoter
fields, it is only seldom that cattle are taken to graze so far for the
sake of some particular kind of grass; hence only a slight fine has been
prescribed in this case.

In the case of these fields also, cattle without a keeper should be
driven off.

In all cases the loss to the owner of the field has to be made good, the
exact amount being determined by experts.

‘*Kṣetrika*’ is *one who has possession of the field*; the word being
formed with the affix ‘*ṭhak*,’ the original term ‘*kṣetra*’ belonging
to the ‘*vrīhyādi*’ group.

‘*Such is the established rule*’—laid down on the subject.

The use of the phrase ‘*in all cases*’ indicates that in the case of
cattle without a creeper also, the loss has to be made good to the owner
of the field by the owner of the cattle.

Though the term ‘*cattle*,’ ‘*paśu*,’ includes all such animals as the
buffalo, the goat, the sheep, the camel, the ass and so forth,—yet, on
the strength of the words of another *Smṛti*, it is restricted to *cows*
only. Gautama (12.24-25) prescribes other fines in the case of animals
other than the cow—‘In the case of the horse and the buffalo, the fine
is to be ten, while in that of goats and sheep two each.’—(241)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 769), which adds the
following—‘The meaning of the verse is as follows:—With the exception of
those fields which have been specifically mentioned by Manu to be such
that for damaging their crops cattle are *not* to be punished;—if the
crops of any other fields happen to be damaged, then the keeper is to be
fined one *kārṣāpaṇa* and a quarter’;—this should be understood as
referring to repeated and serious damage:—‘and in all cases of damage to
crops by cattle, the estimated produce of the field damaged should be
given to the owner.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 234), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anyeṣu*,’ in the case of fields other than those lying on the
outskirts of the village and so forth;—the ‘cattle’ (to be fined) should
here be taken as standing for the *keeper* of the cattle;—it being
impossible for the *cattle* to pay a fine; the fine should be understood
to be a *paṇa and a quarter* for each head of cattle;—and in
*Vīvādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 65), which explains ‘*anyeṣu*,’ as,
‘lying at a distance.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.21-26).—‘If the damage was done in an unenclosed field
near the road, the responsibility falls on the herdsman and on the owner
of the field. Five *māṣas* form the fine to be paid for damage done by a
cow; six for a camel or an ass; ten for a horse or a buffalo; two for
each goat or sheep. If the entire crop has been destroyed, the value of
the whole must be paid in addition to the fine.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 60).—‘In the case of camels and buffaloes running away
after grazing in the reserved pasture-land, one-fourth of a *Paṇa*
should be realised; for cows, horses and asses, one-eighth; in that of
small cattle, one-sixteenth. If they sit on the land after grazing, the
fines shall be double; if they abide on the land, it will be quadruple.
In the case of crops being grazed by cattle, the damage done shall be
computed and double the amount of the value shall be the amount of the
fine inflicted.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.159-160).—‘If crops are damaged by the she-buffalo,
there shall be a fine of eight *māṣas*; half of his, if by the cow; and
half of that again, if by goat or sheep; if they have sat in the field
after grazing, the fine shall be double.’

Do. (2.161).—‘The owner of the field shall receive the value of as much
crop as may have been damaged; the keeper of the cattle should be
beaten, and the owner should be punished with the aforesaid fine.’

*Nārada* (11.38-39).—‘When a man claims damages for crops grazed by
cattle, that quantity of grain should be restored to him by the owner of
the cattle which may have been consumed by the cattle in the estimation
of the neighbours the cows shall be given up to the owner and the grain
to the husbandman. In the same way a fine shall be imposed on the
herdsman when crops have been trodden down by cows.’

Do. (11.31).—‘For damage done by a cow, he shall inflict a fine of one
*māṣa*; two *māṣas* in the case of a she-buffalo; half a *māṣa* in the
case of a goat trespassing with its young.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 235).—‘The owner of the cow should be
made to pay a quarter *Paṇa*; of the she-buffalo, two quarters; of
goats, sheep and calves, one quarter is the fine ordained.’

*Śāṅkha-Likhīta* (Do.).—‘In the case of all calves, one *māṣa*; ten in
that of the she-buffalo; sixteen in that of asses and camels; and four,
in that of goats and sheep.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अन्यक्षेत्राणि पूर्वोक्ताद् अवधेर् यानि बहिः तान्य् उच्यन्ते । गोश् च सपादस्य पणस्योपदेशाद्, उपघातानुरूपेण महिष्यादीनां स्याद् राजभाव्यो दण्डः । **शदः क्षेत्रिकस्य** **सर्वत्र**शब्दाच् च विपाले ऽपि शदो देयत् इति ॥ ८.२४० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

241	(For damage) in other fields (each head of) cattle shall (pay a fine of one (pana) and a quarter, and in all (cases the value of) the crop (destroyed) shall be made good to the owner of the field; that is the settled rule.
</details>
