+++
title = "245 सीमाम् प्रति"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a dispute regarding boundaries arises between two villages, the king shall settle the boundary during the month of Jyeṣṭha, when the landmarks are distinctly perceptible.—(245)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सीमां प्रति विवादे** सीमानिमित्ते । लक्षणेत्थंभूतेति प्रतेः कर्मप्रवचनीयत्वात् द्वितीयानिमित्तम् अपि लक्षणम् इति शक्यते वक्तुम् । **सीमा** मर्यादा ग्रामादीनां विभागः परिमाणम् इयत्ता परिच्छेदनम् इति यावत् । **ज्येष्ठे मासि नयेन्** निर्णयः कर्तव्यः । मासविशेषनिर्णये[^१३९] हेतुम् आह **संप्रकाशेषु सेतुषु** । सेतवः सीमालिङ्गानि वक्ष्यमाणानि लोष्ठपाषाणादिविशिष्टजातीयसीमा[^१४०] ग्राह्या, तृणगुञ्जादीनि[^१४१] प्राग् अस्मात् कालाद् उत्थितेषु[^१४२] तृणेषु लोष्ठपाषाणयोर् अन्यस्याश् च भूमेर् न विशेषो लक्ष्यते । पाषाणलक्षितायां यदा तत्र तृणानि न ज्ञायन्ते तदा सा सीमेति निश्चीयते । एवं वल्लीस्थानादिष्व् अपि । प्राग् वसन्ताद् वासन्तिके दाहे विशेषो न लक्ष्यते । हेत्वभिधानाच् च यस्मिन् देशे यदा व्यज्यन्ते ततो मासात् कालहरणं कर्तुं न देयम्[^१४३] । अन्यदा तु लिङ्गज्ञानार्थं[^१४४] कालापेक्षापि भवतीत्य् एतावत्फलं **ज्येष्ठ**ग्रहणे ॥ ८.२४५ ॥


[^१४४]:
     M G: liṅgājñānārthaṃ


[^१४३]:
     M G J: nādeyam


[^१४२]:
     M G J: anutthiteṣu


[^१४१]:
     M G: tṛṇaṃjādīni; J: -sīmāgrāhyatṛṇa-


[^१४०]:
     M G: -viśeṣajātīya-


[^१३९]:
     DK (1: 933: māsaviśeṣeṇa nirṇayakaraṇe
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Dispute regarding boundaries*,’—*i.e*., dispute on account of
boundary: the particle ‘*prati*’ being a preposition, governs the
accusative, according to Pāṇini 1.4.90: specially as the cause of a
thing also can he spoken of as its characteristic feature.

‘*Boundary*’,—the limit of villages, their division, the exact
determination of their extent.

‘*Shall settle it*’—decide it,—‘*during the month of Jyeṣṭha*.’

The text adds the reason why the boundary should be settled during this
particular month:—‘*when the land-marks are distinctly perceptible*’—
Boundary-marks are going to be described below; such as those consisting
of clods of stone or things of that kind, and also thickets of grass and
the like. Before the advent of the said month, while grass is growing on
all sides, no difference could be perceived between grounds marked by a
stone-piece and other grounds. When however, the boundary is marked by a
piece of stone, if no grasses are visible, then the boundary is easily
determined. Similarly In cases where demarcation has been done by
creepers and thickets, the boundary should be settled before the advent
of spring; for when trees and creepers are burnt down by forest-fires
during the spring, no distinction could be perceived.

In as much as the text has put forward a reason for settling the dispute
during a certain month, it is to be concluded that in a case where the
marks are easily perceptible, the king should not wait for any
particular month, thereby affording time to the parties concerned. It is
only for the purpose of finding the necessary marks that one need wait
for any particular month. This is the sole purpose served by the mention
of the month of *Jyeṣṭha*.—(245)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 201), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Nayet*’, ‘should find out’;—‘*setu*’ here stands for
any mark of boundary,—where these are ‘*saprakāśa*,’ *i*. *e*., quite
perceptible by reason of water having dried up;—the word ‘*Jyaiṣṭha*’
also should be taken as standing for any time which makes it possible
for the boundary-marks to be perceived.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 758), which adds the following notes:—The
term ‘*grāma*’ should be taken including cities, fields and houses in
regard to which boundary-disputes arise, so that boundary-disputes fall
into these four classes;—when the text mentions the month of
‘*Jyeṣṭha*’, it does not mean that it must be done during that month;
all that it means to imply is *convenience*, that month being the most
convenient for the purpose of determining boundaries;—‘*setu*’ stands
for bunds and other boundary-marks;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 92);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 142a), which says that the month of,
‘*Jyeṣṭha*’ is mentioned only by way of illustration; all that is meant
is that it shall be done at a time when the boundary-marks may be
perceptible,—and that ‘*grāma*’ stands for *city* also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.151).—‘They should determine the boundary as indicated
by a mound, coal, chaff or trees; as also by dikes, ant-hills, pits,
bones, stone-piles and such other things.’

*Nārada* (11.4-5).—‘They shall determine the boundary in accordance with
old landmarks, chaff of grain, coal, potsherds, wells, sanctuaries,
trees,—objects of general notoriety, such as ant-hills, artificial
mounds, slopes, hills and the like, fields, gardens, roads and old
dikes.’

*Bṛhaspati* (19.2-6).—‘The determination of boundaries should be settled
at the time of foundation, and it should be marked by visible and
invisible signs, so as to dispel all doubt. Wells, tanks, pools, large
trees, gardens, temples, mounds, channels, the course of a river, sands,
shrubs, or piles of stones;—by such visible signs as these a boundary
line should always be marked; also by other marks deposited underground,
which the earth is not likely to destroy;—such as dry cowdung, bones,
chaff, charcoal, stones, potsherds, sand, bricks, cow’s tails,
cotton-seeds and ashes; after having placed these substances in vessels
one should deposit them there underground at the extremities of the
boundary.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपन्यासश् चित्तप्रणिधानार्थः । **ज्येष्ठमासे** सेतवः, सीमाव्यवच्छेदहेतवः, सुविज्ञाता भवन्ति ॥ ८.२४४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

245	If a dispute has arisen between two villages concerning a boundary, the king shall settle the limits in the month of Gyaishtha, when the landmarks are most distinctly visible.
</details>
