+++
title = "253 यदि स्ंशय"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, even on the inspection of the marks, there should be a doubt, the settlement of the dispute regarding boundaries shall be entirely dependent upon witnesses.—(253)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कथं पुनर् लिङ्गेषु सत्सु संशयः । यानि तावत् प्रच्छन्नानि तानि यदि केनचित् कथंचिद् आगम्य प्रच्छन्नम् अन्यत्र नीयेरन् नैव निश्चयः स्यात् । ये ऽपि प्रकाशा[^१५७] न्यग्रोधादयस् ते ऽपि न सीमायाम् एव रोहन्त्य् अन्यत्रापि जायन्ते ततः संदेह आभासत्वात् । यत्र पुनर् इयं संभावना नास्ति तत्र प्रमाणम् एव लिङ्गानि । 


[^१५७]:
     M G DK: prakāśyā

**साक्षिप्रत्ययः** साक्षिहेतुकः । साक्षिणः प्रत्ययो यत्रेति । **विनिश्चयः** तत्त्वाधिगमः । संशयितलिङ्गे अलिङ्गे वा सीमाविवादे साक्षिहेतुको निर्णय इति तात्पर्यम् ॥ ८.२५३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“How can there be a doubt, when the marks are there?”

If some one were to come and secretly remove the hidden marks to another
place, this would give rise to uncertainty. And as for the open public
marks—in the shape of the *Nyagrodha* and other trees,—it is not that
these trees are to be found on boundaries only; as a matter of fact,
they grow in other places also. It is for these reasons that the said
marks are not always reliable, and hence doubts are likely to arise.

In a case where there is no possibility of such invalidating
circumstances, the marks themselves are sufficient proof.

‘*Dependent upon witnesses*’—*i.e*., due to witnesses. The settlement,
ascertainment, is such as has the witnesses alone for its basis. The
meaning of the verse is that in cases where the marks are doubtful, or
where there are no marks at all, the dispute regarding boundaries can be
settled only by oral testimony.—(253).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 205), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Grameyaka*’ are ‘village-residents,’—their ‘*kula*’
means ‘crowd’,—*vivādinaḥ*’, ‘of the disputants’, is to be construed
with ‘*samakṣam*’, ‘in the presence of.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151) to the effect that the witnesses and
*Sāmantas* should be put on oath and then questioned regarding the
boundary, in the presence of corporations, guilds and so forth.
*Balambhaṭṭī* has the following notes:—‘*Grameyakāḥ*’ are the residents
of the villages,—their ‘*kula*’ are *crowds*; or ‘*kula*’ may be taken
as standing for guilds and corporations &c.,—‘*Sīmāni*,’ ‘in regard to
the boundary.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)  
**

*Nārada* (11.2, 3, 7, 8-10, 12).—‘In all disputes regarding landed
property or boundaries, the decision rests with the neighbours, the
inhabitants of the same town or village, the members of the same
community, and the senior inhabitants of the district;—as also with
those who live outside on the outskirts of the village, and who live by
the tilling of fields situated in those parts, and with herdsmen,
bird-catchers, hunters and other foresters. Should the neighbours speak
falsely, when called upon to decide a question of this sort, they shall
all be punished, one by one, by the King,—each having to pay the fine of
the middlemost amercement. The corporation, the senior inhabitants of
the district and the rest also shall receive the punishment; they shall
have to pay the fine of the first degree, if they make false statements.
The boundary should not be fixed by any one man singlehanded, even
though he be a reliable person; this business should be entrusted to a
plurality of persons, because it is an affair of importance. Should a
single man undertake to fix the boundary, he should do so after having
kept a fast, in a collected frame of mind, wearing a garland of red
flowers and a red cloak, having strewn earth on his head. According to
this rule, let all disputes he decided in regard to houses, gardens,
water-reservoirs, sanctuaries and the rest, as also the space
intermediate between two villages.’

*Bṛhaspati* (19.8-15).—‘In disputes regarding a house or field, the
decision rests with the neighbours, as well as with the inhabitants of
that town or village, or with members of the same community and the
elders of the district;—likewise with husbandmen, artisans, servants,
cowherds, hunters, gleaners, root-diggers, fishermen, kinsmen, criminals
and robbers. After having been adjured by imprecations befitting their
station, they shall determine the boundary, and shall indicate the marks
deposited underground, as evidence. In default of witnesses and signs,
even a single person, agreeable to both parties may fix the boundary,
wearing a garland of red flowers and a red cloak, putting earth on his
head, adhering to truth, and having kept a fast. Neighbours born in the
district, though they may be living abroad, are natives of the place,
and as such may he consulted in such disputes,—What they, as honest and
impartial men, should declare, shall be held to be decisive;—thus
justice will not be violated. Those are witnesses in a suit of this kind
who know the title of acquisition, the size, the duration of possession,
the name and the characteristic features of the land under dispute. The
same rule holds good in all suits concerning immovable property. If the
statements of the deponents do not agree, they shall be made to pay the
fine of the highest degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.152-154).—‘An even number of neighbours—four, eight or
ten—shall determine the boundary, wearing red garlands and clothes and
placing earth upon their heads. If they speak falsely, they should each
be punished by the King with the fine of the middle degree. In the
absence of persons cognisant with the boundary, and of boundary-marks,
the King himself shall determine the boundary. This same rule applies to
disputes relating to gardens, temples, villages, drinking fountains,
houses and parks; as also to streams and drains of rain-water.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 759, *et seq*.).—‘In the absence of witnesses,
neighbours and senior inhabitants and natives of the district shall he
consulted. In the absence of neighbours, disputes between lìelds, and
also between towns and villages, should he determined by reference to
even those who are not neighbours. When the immediate neighbours are
found to be tainted with partiality, the next neighbours shall ho
consulted;—so on and on; always discarding those interested and partial,
the King shall determine the boundary in consultation with other natives
of the place. If a single person, accepted by both parties, should seek
to determine the boundary, he should proceed to do it, clad in red
clothes and placing earth on his head. If even a number of men who have
been brought together fail to determine the boundary, cither through
fear or through greed, they should be made to pay the fine of the
highest degree. If they speak without knowledge, they should be
punished; and if, on reconsideration of the boundary, they be found to
have deposed falsely, they should he made to pay the fine of the highest
degree.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.13-15).—‘In a dispute about a house or a field, reliance
may he placed on the deposition of neighbours. If the statements of the
neighbours disagree, documents may be taken as proof. If conflicting
documents are produced, reliance may he placed upon the statements of
aged inhabitants of the village or town, and on those of guilds and
corporations.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[न कुतश्चिल् लिङ्ग्]ओत्पत्ताव् उभयथा लिङ्गानुस्मृतौ च साक्षिप्रत्ययः ॥ ८.२५२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

253	If there be a doubt even on inspection of the marks, the settlement of a dispute regarding boundaries shall depend on witnesses.
</details>
