+++
title = "267 शतम् ब्राह्मणम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On abusing a Brāhmaṇa the Kṣatriya should be fined one hundred; and the Vaiśya one hundred and fifty; or two hundred; the Śūdra however deserves immolation.—(267)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

परुषवचनम् **आक्रोशः** । स च बहुधा- नृशंसाश्लीलभाषणान् मर्मणि तोदः,[^१८७] अभिशापः अकरणम् "हन्त[^१८८] वृषलो भूयाः[^१८९]", असता[^१९०] दुःखोत्पादनम्[^१९१] "कन्या ते गर्भ्णी" इति, पातकोपपातकैर् योजनम्[^१९२] इति । तत्र द्वयोर् ब्राह्मणाक्रोशे[^१९३] क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर्[^१९४] अयं दण्डः । अन्यत्र "पतनीये कृते क्षेपे दण्डो मध्यमसाहसः" (य्ध् २.२१४) इत्यादि स्मृत्यन्तरोक्तः । शूद्रस्य[^१९५] वधः ताडनजिह्वाछेदनमारणादिरूपः[^१९६] आक्रोशभेदाद् वेदितव्यः[^१९७] ॥ ८.२६७ ॥


[^१९७]:
     M G: ākrośabhedā veditavyāḥ


[^१९६]:
     M G: vadhatāḍane jihvāchedanamāraṇādi sarva


[^१९५]:
     M G: tasya; DK: tasya śūdrasya ca


[^१९४]:
     M G: kṣatriyāvaiśyayor


[^१९३]:
     M G J: brāhmaṇakrośe


[^१९२]:
     M G J: yājanam


[^१९१]:
     J: upanyasanaṃ


[^१९०]:
     M G: asatāṃ; J: asata


[^१८९]:
     M G J: vṛṣalabhūyāḥ


[^१८८]:
     M G J: akaraṇahantā


[^१८७]:
     M G: nṛśaṃsāślīlabhāṣaṇaṃ tena bhaṇito yo
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Abusing*’ is speaking harshly. In most cases it takes the following
forms:—(*a*) Causing pain by addressing foul words;—(*b*) cursing
without reason—‘O low-born one, may you suffer long’;—(*c*) giving false
information; *e.g*., ‘your unmarried daughter is pregnant’;—(*d*)
defamation, attributing to him serious or non-serious offences.

The punishment to be inflicted upon the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya for
abusing a Brāhmaṇa is as here laid down. In another *Smṛti*
(Yājñavalkya, 2.2.10) however we read—‘If a defamation refers to a
heinous offence, the penalty shall consist of the middle amercement;
while if it refer to a minor offence, it shall be the lowest
amercement.’

For the *Śūdra* ‘*immolation*,’—in the form of beating, cutting off the
tongue, actual death, and so forth, to be adjusted in accordance, with
the exact nature of the abuse.—(267)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 808), which adds that ‘*vadha*’
here means ‘cutting off the tongue’;—in *Parāśaramadhava* (Vyavahāra, p.
295);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.207),.where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following
notes:—‘*Adhyardha*,’ 150,—whether it should be 150 or 200 in any
particular case is to depend upon the lightness or gravity of the
offence,—‘*vadha*,’ beating and so forth.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 250), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Ākruśya*’ stands for the ‘middle’ kind of defamation—says
*Pārijāta*;—‘*adhyardham śatam*’, 150,—‘*dve vā*’, this alternative is
prescribed in view of the comparative gravity of the
defamation;—‘*vadha*’, beating, cutting off of the tongue and so forth.

It is quoted’ in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 99);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, 44b);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 70), which explains
‘*adhyardham*’ as ‘one and a half’, and ‘*vadha*’ as ‘beating’, and says
that the punishment, in the case of the Vaiśya and the Śūdra also, is
for defamation;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 149a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

*Gautama* (12. 1, 8, 10-13).—‘A Śūdra who intentionally reviles
twice-born men, by criminal abuse, or criminally assaults them with
blows, shall be deprived of the limb with which he has offended. A
Kṣatriya shall he fined one hundred, if he abuses a Brāhmaṇa. A Vaiśya
who abuses a Brāhmaṇa shall pay one and a half (times as much as the
Kṣatriya). A Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya shall pay 50; half of that for
abusing a Vaiśya; nothing for abusing a Śūdra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.206.207).—‘The fine is half for reviling one lower than
one’s self, double, for reviling women and superior persons; thus shall
the fine he inflicted in accordance with the superiority or inferiority
of the castes concerned. If a person abuses another belonging to a
higher caste, he shall be fined double and treble (of 50 *Paṇas*); if
one abuses another belonging to a lower caste, the fine shall be reduced
by half of the afore-mentioned.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 104).—‘Among the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya,
the Śūdra and the Caṇḍāla,—if the succeeding reviles the preceding, the
fine shall be 3 *Paṇas*;—if the preceding reviles the succeeding, it
shall be 2 *Paṇas*.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.23, 33-35-38).—‘If the Śūdra uses abusive language, his
tongue shall be cut off;—for using insulting language, he shall be fined
a hundred *kārṣāpaṇas*;—for insulting a man by using bad language
regarding his mother, the highest amercement;—for abusing a man of his
own caste, he shall be fined twelve *Paṇas*; for abusing a man of a
lower caste, six *Paṇas*;—for insulting a member of the highest caste,
or of his own caste (at the same time), the same fine is ordained;—or if
he only returns his insult, a fine amounting to three *kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.14).—‘The tongue of a Śūdra who speaks evil of a
virtuous person, belonging to one of the first three castes, shall be
cut out.’

*Nārada* (15-16.15-17, 22, 25).—‘A Kṣatriya who reviles a Brāhmaṇa must
pay one hundred *Paṇas* as fine; a Vaiśya must pay one and a half
hundred, or two hundred; a Śūdra deserves corporal punishment. A
Brāhmaṇa shall he fined fifty *Paṇas* for calumniating a Kṣatriya; in
the case of a Vaiśya, the fine shall he half of fifty; in the case of a
Śūdra, it shall be twelve *Paṇas*. When a twice-born person offends
against a member of his own caste, he shall pay twelve *Paṇas* as fine.
When he utters calumnies which ought never to be uttered, the fine shall
be twice as high. A once-born man who insults members of a twice-born
caste with gross invectives, shall have his tongue cut out... With
whatever limb a low-caste man offends against a Brāhmaṇa, that very limb
of his shall be cut off; such shall be the atonement of his crime.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 251).—‘A Brāhmaṇa abusing a
Kṣatriya should be fined 100; 50 for abusing a Vaiśya and ‘25 for
abusing a Śūdra.’

*Bṛhaspāti* (20.6-11).—‘When persons equal in caste and qualities abuse
one another, the punishment ordained for them is thirteen *Paṇas* and a
half. For a Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya, the fine shall be a
half-hundred; for abusing a Vaiśya, half of fifty; for abusing a Śūdra,
twelve and half. This punishment has been ordained for abusing a
virtuous Śūdra who has committed no wrong; no offence is imputable to a
Brāhmaṇa for abusing a Śūdra devoid of virtue. A Vaiśya shall he fined a
hundred *Paṇas* for reviling a Kṣatriya; a Kṣatriya reviling a Vaiśya
shall have to pay half of that amount as fine. In the case of a Kṣatriya
reviling a Śūdra, the fine shall be twenty *Paṇas*; in the case of a
Vaiśya, double that amount. The Śūdra shall be compelled to pay the fine
of the first amercement for abusing a Vaiśya; the middle amercement for
abusing a Kṣatriya 5 and the highest amercement for abusing a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīvādaratnākara, p. 248).—‘For abusing a person of a
higher caste, the offender should propitiate him and pay a fine of three
*kārṣāpaṇas*;—on insulting a man of the same caste as oneself the fine
is twelve *kārṣāpanas*; and twenty-four, for insulting a person of
superior qualifications.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 251).—‘For a low-caste man abusing one of a higher
caste, the fine is eight *Purāṇas* (Purāṇa being equal to 32 silver
*kṛṣṇalas*).’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अवचनीयाद् आक्रोशाद् ऋते अन्यस्मिन्न् आक्रोशे एते यथार्हं दण्डवि[धयः ब्राःमणाक्रोशने यो] वैश्यस्य दण्ड उक्तः ततो ऽर्धं क्षत्रियम् आक्रुश्य वैश्यस्य न्यायाद् आप्नोति दण्डम् । शूद्रस्य त्व् एकजातिदण्डः "एकजातिर् द्विजातिम्" इति द्विजातिमात्र्[आक्रोशने तद्विधानात् ॥ ८.२६६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

267	A Kshatriya, having defamed a Brahmana, shall be fined one hundred (panas); a Vaisya one hundred and fifty or two hundred; a Sudra shall suffer corporal punishment.
</details>
