+++
title = "281 सहासनम् अभिप्रेप्सुर्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a low-born person tries to occupy the same seat with his superior, he should be branded on the hip and banished; or the king shall have his buttocks cut off.—(281)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उत्कृष्टो** ब्राह्मणो जातितो दौःशील्याद् अवकृष्टो ऽपि, इतरे वर्णा औत्तराधर्येण परस्परापक्षयोत्कृष्टाश् चावकृष्टाश् च । तत्रेह[^२२३] **अवकृष्टज** इति जनिना जन्मावकर्ष[^२२४] उपात्तः,[^२२५] तत्संनिधानाद् उत्कर्षो ऽपि जन्मनैव । जन्मना च निरपेक्षोत्कर्षो ब्राह्मणस्य नापकर्षः । तेन शूद्रस्यायं ब्राह्मणेन सहैकम् आसनम् आरूढवतो दण्डः । **कटिः** श्रोणी । तत्र कृतचिह्नः । अङ्कविधौ च सुधाकुंकुमादिना चिह्नकरणमात्रम्, अपि तु[^२२६] दण्डख्यापनार्थम्[^२२७] । अतिक्रमाद् विभियुर्[^२२८] इति । तेन देशान्तरे यद् अनपायि तच् चिह्नम् आयसो लेखनाद् उपदिश्यते । तथा च वक्ष्यति "उद्वेजनकरैर् दण्डैर् चिहनयित्वा" (म्ध् ८.३५२) इति । राष्ट्राच् च निष्कास्यः । **स्फिक्** श्रोण्येकदेशः । सव्यो दक्षिणश् च । तं **चावकर्तयेत्** चिह्नेन । विकल्पविधानात् तावन्मातरच्छेदो न सर्वस्य स्फिजः । **अभिप्रेप्सुर्** इति च नेच्छामात्रेण । किं तर्हि, प्राप्तवत एव । इच्छाया शक्यापह्नवत्वाद् दण्डस्य च महत्त्वात् ॥ ८.२८१ ॥


[^२२८]:
     M G: vibhidyur


[^२२७]:
     M G: daṇḍaḥ khyāpanārthaḥ


[^२२६]:
     M G DK: api ayaṃ tu


[^२२५]:
     M G: upāttaṃ


[^२२४]:
     M G: janma cotkarṣa


[^२२३]:
     J: tatra
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Superior*’—i.e., the Brāhmaṇa, who is always ‘superior’ by reason of
his caste, even though he be ‘inferior’ on account of his bad character.
In the case of the other castes ‘superiority’ and ‘inferiority’ are
relative and comparative (so that everyone of them may be ‘superior’ and
also ‘inferior’). It is for this reason that the text has used the term
‘lowborn,’ where the term ‘born’ shows that what is meant is
‘inferiority’ by *birth*; hence on account of its proximity, the
‘superiority’ also should be understood to be by *birth*. This
superiority by *birth* belongs to the Brāhmaṇa, irrespectively of other
considerations, and he is never ‘inferior.’ From all which it follows
that the punishment here laid down is for the *Śūdra* who occupies the
same seat with the *Brāhmaṇa*.

‘*Hips*,’—buttocks;—‘*branded*’ upon that. This ‘branding’ is to be not
mere marking with lime or saffron or such things; but it is to be
indicative of the man’s having undergone the punishment; so that others
might fight shy of the same transgression. Hence the marking prescribed
is one that is ineffaceable, and should he done with an iron-nail or
some such thing; as is going to be laid down below (8.352)—‘Punishments
that strike terror, etc., etc.’

He should also be ‘*banished*’ from the kingdom.

‘*Sphik*’ is the name of a part of the buttocks, on both the right and
the left side. This he ‘*shall have cut off*.’ In as much as this is an
alternative to ‘branding,’ it is only the part, and not the entire
buttock, that is to be cut off.

‘*Tries to occupy*’;—the man is to be punished not merely for *trying*
to do so, but only when he has actually occupied it; because the mere
*wish* or *attempt* can be hidden (and hence may not he discovered), and
also because the penalty laid down is very severe.—(281)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 814);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 268), which adds the following notes:—‘*Sahāsanamabhiprepsuḥ*’
sitting on the same seat,—‘*abhiprepsu*’ (lit. *desirous of getting at*)
standing here for actually *getting at* itself,—the man sitting upon the
same seat with his superior should be ‘branded on his hip and
banished—‘*utkṛṣṭa*,’ the Brāhmaṇa, ‘*apakṛṣṭaja*,’ the
Śūdra,—‘*kṛtāṅkah*’, branded with red hot iron,—‘*spicha*,’ a part of
the loin;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p.75), which says that the
‘branding’ is to be done with iron, and that ‘*spicha*’ is a part of the
waist.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.7).—‘If he assumes a position equal to that of twice-born
men, in sitting, in lying down, in conversation, or on the road, he
shall undergo corporal punishment.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.15).—‘A. Śūdra who assumes a position equal to that of
a member of the first three castes, in conversation, on the road, or a
coach, in sitting and on similar occasions, shall be flogged.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.20).—‘If he places himself on the same seat with his
superior, he shall be banished with a mark on his buttocks.’

*Nārada* (15-16. 26).—‘A low-born man, who tries to place himself on the
same seat with his superior in caste, shall be branded on his hip and
banished; or the King shall cause his backside to be gashed.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

281	A low-caste man who tries to place himself on the same seat with a man of a high caste, shall be branded on his hip and be banished, or (the king) shall cause his buttock to be gashed.
</details>
