+++
title = "282 अवनिष्ठीवतो दर्पाद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, out of arrogance, he spits, the king should have his two lips cut off; if he urinates, then his penis; and if he breaks wind, his anus.—(282)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मूत्रेणावसिञ्चतो ऽभिमुखं वा तदवमानार्थं क्षिपतो ऽसत्य् अपि संस्पर्शे ऽवमानयते मूत्रेणेति निष्कर्तव्यः । समानफलत्वाद् एतस्यापि दण्डो ऽयम् । **निष्टीवनं** नासिकास्यश्रावः । तस्य[^२२९] घ्राणेन क्षेपे नासापुटच्छेदः, "येनाङ्गेन" (म्ध् ८.२७९) इत्य् उक्तत्वात् । **शर्धनं** कुत्सितो गुदशब्दः । **दर्पान्** न प्रमादात् ॥ ८.२८२ ॥


[^२२९]:
     M G: nāsikāsyaśrāvasya
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If he sprinkles urine on his superior, or passes urine in his presence,
with a view to insult him,—then, even though the urine may not actually
touch the man, yet, in as much as he insults his superior with
‘urination,’ the penis shall he cut off.

This same rule applies to the case of *semen*; as the effect is the same
in this ease also.

‘Spitting’ consists in letting the fluid pass out of the nostrils or the
mouth. Hence if it is done through the nostrils, it is the nostrils that
have to be cut off; in accordance with what has been said (under 279)
regarding the punishment to be inflicted upon that limb with which the
offence has been committed.

‘*Breaking wind*’—is making an improper sound with the anus.

All this is to be punished, when done ‘*out of arrogance*’ and not when
done by chance.—(282)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 268), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Āvaniṣṭhīvato darpāt*’, through arrogance spitting on
the superior,—‘*avamūtrayataḥ*,’ sprinkling urine,—‘*avaśardhayataḥ*,’
passing wind through the anus with a loud sound;—in *Aparārka* (p. 814),
which takes it as prescribing the penalty for the *Śūdra* doing these
things upon twice-born persons;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p,
288);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2. 115) where *Bālambhaṭṭī* remarks that the acts
here mentioned are indications of disregard and contempt;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, pp. 75 and 73).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.21-22).—‘If he spits on him, he shall lose both lips;—if he
breaks wind against him, his hind-parts.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 106).—‘If he touches one with unclean limbs, or with
the feet, or with spittings, he shall be fined 6 *Paṇas*; if with vomits
or urine or ordure, 12 *Paṇas*; if he touches the body above the navel,
the double of these; if on the head, then four times. This among equals.
If one does all this to a superior, then the fine shall be double; half
only if it is done inadvertently.’

*Nārada* (15-16. 27).—‘If, through arrogance, he spits on a superior,
the King shall have both his lips to be cut off; if he makes water on
him, the penis: if he breaks wind against him, the buttocks.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.213-214).—‘If one touches another person with ashes, or
mud, or dust,—the fine shall be 10 *Paṇa*.s; if he touches him with an
unclean hand, or with the foot, or with spittings, the fine shall be
double of that. This refers to the case of equals; if the offence is
against another man’s wife, or against superior persons, the fine shall
be double; if against inferiors, it shall be half; there is to be no
punishment if all this is done under the influence of liquor and such
things.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 813).—‘The fine is to be quadrupled if one
touches another person with vomitings, urine or ordure; and sixfold if
the middle of the body is touched; and eightfold, if the head is
touched.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 266).—‘If one of a lower caste catches
hold of the neck, or breasts or hair or mouth of a person of the higher
caste, the fine shall be 30; 63, for uprooting his hair and for
threatening him.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

282	If out of arrogance he spits (on a superior), the king shall cause both his lips to be cut off; if he urines (on him), the penis; if he breaks wind (against him), the anus.
</details>
