+++
title = "316 शासनाद् वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The thief becomes absolved from the theft, either through punishment or through acquittal. By not punishing the thief, the king imbibes the guilt of the thief.—(310)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शासनान्** मुशलादिभिः प्रहरणात् क्षत्रियादिः पापान् मुच्यते । **विमोक्षाद्** उत्सर्गात् । गच्छ क्षान्तम् इति "ब्राह्मणस् तपसैव" (म्ध् ११.९९) इति वधतपसी विहिते । तत्र वधस् तावद् ब्राह्मणस्य नास्ति । तपस् तु प्रायश्चित्तं । न च तपसि[^१५] इच्छातो राजाभिगमनम् अस्ति । तस्मात् क्षत्रियादीनाम् एष विमोक्षः । स च धनदण्डं गृहीत्वा । यत आह **अशासित्वे**त्यादि । न च विमोक्षणसुद्धौ सत्यां राज्ञस् तदशासनाद् दोषोपपत्तिः । न च "शासनम् अपि विहितं मोक्षो ऽपि विहित, तत्र यस्मिन् पक्षे शासनं तदपेक्षं दोषवचनम्" । पाक्षिकं हि तथा कल्पनम्[^१६] । न च नित्यवच् छ्रुतस्य पाक्षिकत्वं युक्तं कल्पयितुम् । तथा च सामान्येन वसिष्ठादय आहुः । 


[^१६]:
     M G DK (1: 1703): kalpet


[^१५]:
     M G J: tapa

- एनो ऋच्छति[^१७] राजानम्[^१८] उत्सृजन्तं सकिल्बिषन् ।


[^१८]:
     DK: rājānam ṛcchati


[^१७]:
     M G J: adharmena svīyena ṛcchati

- तं चेद् घातयेद्[^१९] राजा घ्नन् धर्मेण न दुष्यति ॥ (वध् १९.४६) 


[^१९]:
     M G: cejyādyato

नायं विकल्पो युक्तः । क्वचिद् इयं हिंसा प्रतिषिद्धा- "न हिंस्याद् भूतानि" इति रागादिना पुरुषार्थतया प्राप्ता । क्वचिद् विहिता- क्रत्वर्थत्वेन "यो दीक्षितो यद् अग्नीषोमीयम्" (त्स् ६.१.११.६) इति । इदं[^२०] तु शासनविमोक्षणवचनं[^२१] न हि नाम प्रतिषिद्धं[^२२] सति विधौ । 


[^२२]:
     M G: pratiṣiddhādyuktau; DK: pratiṣiddhā ukte


[^२१]:
     M G: -vañcanā; DK: -vañcanāt


[^२०]:
     M G DK: iyaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथं</u> न प्रतिषेधो "न हिंस्याद् भूतानि" इति सामान्यतः प्रतिषेधो विधिविशेषम् अन्तरेण न शक्यो बाधितुम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अथोच्यते</u> । नैवायं प्रतिषेधस्य विषयः, कर्मार्थत्वात् । कथं पुनर् अन्तरेण विधिं कर्मार्थता शक्यावगन्तुम् । लोकत इति चेत्, लौकिकी तर्हि प्रवृत्तिः । कथं तर्हि प्रतिषेधस् तत्रावतरेत् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">ननु</u> च प्रदाने प्रवृत्तिर् निरूप्यताम् । यदि तावद् वैदिकी प्रवृत्तिस् ततस् तदङ्गे हिंसायाम् अपि तत एव । एका हि प्रवृत्तिर् अङ्गप्रधानयोः[^२३] । अथ लिप्सातो ऽङ्गे ऽपि तत्र[^२४] प्रवृत्तिः, सुतरां तर्हि हिंसेयं लौकिकी । जीविकार्थिनो हि प्रजापालनाधिकारनियमो न[^२५] वेधः । तेनेयम् अङ्गस्थापि हिंसा श्येनेन[^२६] तुल्यत्वात् प्रतिषेधविषयः । न च लौकिकम् अस्या नियतम् अङ्गत्वम् । नो[^२७] हिंसाम् अन्तरेण प्रजापालनम् अशक्यम्, निरोधादिनापि शक्यत्वात् । नैष नियमः । एकरूपाङ्गप्रधानयोः प्रवृत्तिर् इति स्यान् नाग्नीषोमीययोर् अनेन न[^२८] विशेषः स्यात् । अतो लिप्सालक्षणे ऽपि प्रधाने ऽङ्गे विधिलक्षणम्[^२९] अभ्युपेतव्यम् । न चैषां[^३०] हिंसा विधिलक्षणा[^३१] शक्याभ्युपगन्तुं स्वरूपस्य कार्यस्य च लौकिकत्वात् पालनस्य हिंसायाश् च । अथ विधिलक्षणा षोडशिग्रहणवद्[^३२] विकल्पितुम् अर्हति शासनवचनेन प्रतिषिद्धा । 


[^३२]:
     M G: ṣoḍaśa-


[^३१]:
     M G: vidhiḥ lakṣaṇā


[^३०]:
     M G J: caiṣa


[^२९]:
     M G: pradhānāṅgavidhilakṣaṇam


[^२८]:
     M G J omit: na


[^२७]:
     DK: na


[^२६]:
     M G: mukhyena; J: śyena-


[^२५]:
     M G DK: 'tra


[^२४]:
     DK: tata eva


[^२३]:
     M G: antaraṅga-

<u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्यन्ते । द्वे एते वाक्ये । शासनाद् इति स्तेनस्य बुद्धिर् उच्यते । परेणार्धेन राज्ञस् तदशासने दोषः । तत्र यदि राजाशासनदोषम् आत्मन्य् अङ्गीकृत्य मुञ्चेन् मुच्येतैवैनसः । एवं ब्राह्मणस्यापि स्वयम् आगतस्य वधः शुद्धिहेतुः-[^३३] "लक्ष्यं शास्त्रभृताम्[^३४]" (म्ध् ११.७२) इति वचनात् । "न शारीरो ब्राह्मणदण्डः" (ग्ध्१२.४३) इति[^३५] राजा यदि प्रतिषेधातिक्रमेण हन्याद् ब्राह्मणः शुध्येद् एव ।   
**अशासित्वा** मुशलादिभिर् अहत्वा । **स्तेनस्य** यत् पापं तेन युज्यते ॥ ८.३१६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Through punishment*’— with the stroke of the pestle and other things,
the thief of the *Kṣatriya* and lower castes ‘*becomes absolved*’ from
the guilt;—or ‘*through acquittal*’—*i.e*., by being let off, being
addressed with the words—‘Go, you have been forgiven.’

In regard to the *Brāhmaṇa thief*, under 11.100 below, ‘immolation’ and
‘austerities’ have been prescribed. But as a matter of fact, there can
be no ‘immolation’ of the *Brāhmaṇa*; and ‘austerity’ being an expiatory
rite, the ‘approaching’ of the king could not be with a view to any such
austerity. Hence the ‘*acquittal*’ here spoken of must also refer to the
*Kṣatriya* and other castes.

But there can be this ‘acquittal’ only after the fine has been realised;
because of what is said in the second half of the verse. And when the
man has become absolved through this acquittal, his non-punishment
cannot render the king open to censure.

It might be argued that—“Punishment and acquittal both being sanctioned
by law, the blame spoken of lies on the king in that, ease with
reference to which punishment has been enjoined.”

But this would make the injunction optional; and it is not right to
assume as optional what has been declared to be absolute. In fact
Vaśiṣṭha and others have laid down the law in general terms:—‘The thief
contaminates with his guilt the king who acquits him; but if the king
kills the guilty thief, since he kills him legally, no blame attaches to
him’;—and it cannot be right to regard this as optional.

It is true that the injuring of a living being is in one place
forbidden: the assertion ‘one should not injure any living being,’
forbidding such injury as might he inflicted under the influence of some
passion. In another place it is sanctioned, as for instance, in
connection with the *Agniṣṭoma* sacrifice.

But in the case in question the act of ‘punishing’ cannot, in the face
of the direct injunction of it, be held to be forbidden by the
declaration regarding ‘acquittal.’

How can it be regarded as *not forbidden*? The general prohibition
‘injure not a living being’ cannot be set aside, except when there is a
direct injunction of such injury (in any particular case).

It might be argued that—“The case in question does not fall within the
scope of the prohibition; since it is conducive to the fulfilment of a
particular act that has to be done.”

But, in the absence of a distinct injunction, how can it be believed
that a certain injuring is conducive to the fulfilment of an act?

It may be held that this would he learnt from worldly experience.

But in that case, the act being an ordinary worldly one,—how could any
prohibition affect it?

Let us consider the nature of the main act in question. If it is Vedic,
then the injuring of animals which forms part of that act must also
derive its sanction from the Veda. Because the principal and its
subsidiary both must derive their sanction from the same source. If,
even in the case of a *Vedic* act, a mere desire for gain forms the
motive, then, in that case, the injuring of the animal becomes a
*worldly* act. So that, in the case of the injuring of human beings by
the king inflicting punishments, the act forms part of that action of
‘protecting the people’ which is undertaken, by way of livelihood; and
as such it cannot form the subject of any Vedic Injunction. In fact,
even if the injuring formed part of a prescribed act, it could not form
the object of prohibition; as it would stand on the same, footing as the
*Śyena* sacrifice. The act of injuring again does not form a necessary
factor even in the worldly act (of protecting); for it is not impossible
to carry on the work of protection without inflicting injury;—the same
purpose being served by *reprimanding* and other similar means also.

It is not necessary that the motive behind the principal act and its
subsidiaries should he of the same kind. If it were, then there would be
no difference in the nature of the immolations of the two animals
offered to Agni-Soma (?). So that even when the principal act is
prompted by a desire for gain, it may be possible to regard its
subsidiary as prompted by an Injunction.

The act of ‘injuring’ under consideration however cannot be regarded as
prompted by an Injunction; as by its very nature, the act of
‘protecting,’ as also that of ‘injuring,’ is ‘worldly.’ If they were
prompted by an Injunction, then there would be an option between its
prohibition (by the general prohibition of all injury) and its
injunction as part of the act of ‘protecting,’—just as there is in the
case of the *holding* and *not-holding* of the *Śoḍaśī* vessels.

Others hold that the verse consists of two distinct sentences;—the first
half of the verse describing the way in which the thief becomes absolved
from guilt, and the latter indicating the impropriety involved in the
king’s failure to punish the thief, So that in a case where the king
lets off the thief, thus voluntarily incurring the sin of not punishing
him,—the thief does become absolved from his guilt.

Similarly when a Brāhmaṇa-thief surrenders himself, if he is killed, he
does become absolved from guilt; since we have the text—‘Becoming the
target of armed men, etc.’ (11.73). And even though in striking the
Brāhmaṇa the king may be going against the prohibition—‘For the Brāhmaṇa
there shall be no corporeal punishment’ (Gautama, 12.46),—yet there can
be no doubt that the Brāhmaṇa, thus punished, becomes absolved from his
guilt.

‘*By not punishing*’—not striking him with the pestle or other things—he
becomes contaminated with the guilt of the thief.—(316)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 1079).—(See above.)

*Bodhāyana* (2.1-17).—‘Whether he be punished or be pardoned, the thief
becomes freed from his guilt. But if the King does not punish him, the
guilt of the thief falls upon him.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.41).—‘It is declared in the Veda that the thief becomes
purified by death caused with the club offered to him by the King.’

*Gautama* (12.44-45).—‘Whether he be slain or pardoned, he becomes
purified of his guilt. If the King does not strike him, the guilt falls
on the King.’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.4-5).—‘... If the thief dies, his sin is expiated. If
he is forgiven by the King, the guilt falls upon him who forgives him.’

*Viṣṇu* (52.2).—‘Whether the King kills the thief with the club, or
dismisses him unhurt, he becomes purified.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.257).—(See under 314-315.)

*Nārada* (Theft).—‘By going to the King and confessing his guilt, the
thief becomes purified. The King shall touch him with a club, or dismiss
him; in either case he becomes purified. Those men who have received a
punishment from the King for an offence committed by them, proceed to
heaven, free from sin, as if they were virtuous men who have acted well.
Whether he be punished or released, the thief is freed from his crime;
if, however, the King does not punish him. the guilt of the thief falls
on the King himself.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **शासनाद् [वा विमोक्षाद् वा स्तेनः स्तेयाद् विमुच्यते ।**

**शासनाद्** वा] वधलक्षणाद् अपराधमहत्त्वापेक्षया निर्धनतया **विमोक्षाद्** वा धनदण्डितः सन् । अपराधमहत्त्वे ऽपि ब्राह्मणः स्तेनः स्तेयाद् विमुच्यते । एतस्माद् एव कारणाद् अयं दण्डविकल्पः । तथा च गौतमः अस्मिन्न् एव प्रकरणे "न शारीरो ब्राह्मणदण्डः" इत्य् आह । यस् तु स्वयम् अनुपगतो ब्राह्मणस्तेनो राजपुरुषैर् आनीयते विदितापराधैर् बलात् तस्यापि च न वधः । किं तर्हि "कर्मवियोगविख्यापनविवासनाङ्ककरणानि" । तथापि च सर्वस्य हिरण्यादिस्तेनस्य दण्डविधिर् अयम् उपदिष्टः; यतः स्वयम् उपगतयोर् ब्राह्मणाब्राह्मणयोर् एवं दण्ड्यतैव स्यात् । तथा च सति ।

> **अशासित्वा तु तं राजा स्तेनस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३१५ ॥**

एवं च सत्य् एतद् अनयोः प्रायश्चित्तं शुद्धिहेतुत्वाद् विज्ञेयम् । तथा च राजाभिगमनं स्वयम् अनयोर् अर्थवद् भवतीति । वक्ष्यति हि ऽराजभिः कृतदण्डास् तु" इति । यस् तु राज्ञा बलाद् दण्ड्यते वध्यते वा न तस्य तेन दण्डेन निष्कृतिर् अस्ति । यतः तेन दण्डेन दण्डितेनापि सता प्रायश्चित्तं कर्तव्यम् एव । यश् च स्वयम् एव प्रायश्चित्तम् आरभते न तत्र राज्ञो हस्तप्रक्षेपो ऽस्ति । तथा च वक्ष्यति "प्रायश्चित्तं तु कुर्वानाः" इति । तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च धनस्वामिनो ऽनेन दण्डितेनापि कार्यैव । अकुर्वंश् चैव राजा स्तेननिग्रहम् आत्मापघातं कुर्यात् ॥ ८.३१५ ॥

_यस्माद् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

316	Whether he be punished or pardoned, the thief is freed from the (guilt of) theft; but the king, if he punishes not, takes upon himself the guilt of the thief.
</details>
