+++
title = "323 पुरुषाणाङ् कुलीनानाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For stealing noble men, and specially women, and the precious gems, the thief deserves ‘immolation.’—(323)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्कुले जाता विद्यादिगुणयोगिनः **कुलीनाः । नारीणां च विशेषतो** गुणरूपसौभाग्यसंपन्नानाम्[^७०] इत्य् अर्थः । **च**शब्दात् कुलीनानां इत्य् एव । परस्परापेक्षाणि नारीणां विशेषणानि । **मुख्यानि** उत्तमानि **रत्नानि** वज्रवैडूर्यमरकतप्रभृतीनि । अत्रापि सुवर्णशततुल्यानीत्य् अपेक्ष्यम् । अन्यथोत्तमत्वम् आपेक्षिकम् इति दण्डो न व्यवतिष्ठेत । **वधम् अर्हति** । अनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षया सर्वत्रार्हत्यर्थो[^७१] योजनीयः । अकुलीनानाम् अवशिष्टानाम् अमुख्यानां च "शेषे[^७२] त्व् एकादशगुणम्" (म्ध् ८.३२२) इत्य्[^७३] एव ॥ ८.३२३ ॥


[^७३]:
     M G J DK: ekādaśaguṇa ity; I follow the reading of MDh 8.322 of which this is a citation.


[^७२]:
     M G: viśeṣe; DK: haraṇe


[^७१]:
     J: sarvatra vadhyartho


[^७०]:
     M G: -saubhāgyataḥ saṃpannānām
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Noble*,’—born of good families and possessed of learning and other
good qualities.

‘*Specially women*,’—snoh as are possessed of good qualities, beauty and
grace.

The particle ‘*ca*,’ ‘*and*,’ indicates that ‘*nobility*’ and the other
qualifications are meant, as far as possible, to be applicable to both
‘men’ and ‘women.’

‘*Precious gems*,’—such as diamond, lapis-lazuli, emerald and so forth.

Here also it is to be understood that the articles stolen should he
equivalent in value to ‘a hundred of gold’; otherwise, since the
qualification ‘precious’ is a relative term, there would be no
definiteness in the rule prescribing the punishment.

‘*Deserves immolation*’;—the exact meaning of ‘immolation’ is to be
determined in all cases by the peculiarity of the circumstances of each
individual case.

In the case of the stealing of men and women who are not ‘noble,’ or of
gems that are not ‘precious,’—there shall be a fine eleven times the
value of what is stolen.—(323)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 317), which explains
‘*Kulīnānām*’ as ‘born of good families—and ‘*mukhyānām ratnānām*’ as
‘emerald and the like’,—again at p. 324.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—The reading of the third foot accepted by all is
‘*mukhyānāñcaiva ratnānām*’, and ‘*ratnānāñcaiva sarveṣām*’ is wrong
reading; the meaning is that ‘for stealing persons born of great
families, specially ladies of great families, and also of diamond,
sapphire and other valuable gems, the thief deserves the death-penalty’
in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 344), which says that this clearly refers to
the enticing away of boys and girls of good families, and not of
slaves,—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 134), which explains ‘*mukhya-ratna*’
as standing for the emerald and the rest;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 152a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (Theft, 28).—‘he who steals a man shall have to pay the highest
fine; he who steals a woman shall be deprived of his entire wealth; and
he who steals a maiden shall suffer corporal punishment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22. 27-28).—‘In the case of women, men, gold, gems, the
property of a deity or a Brāhmaṇa, silk and other precious things, the
fine shall be equal to the value of the article stolen; or double that
amount shall he inflicted as fine; or the thief shall be executed.’

Do. (22.18; Vivādaratnākara, p. 317)—‘Those who steal human beings
should be burnt by the slow fire of chaff.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘The stealer of women shall he burnt on an iron bed by
the slow fire of chaff; the stealer of man should have his hands and
feet cut off and then exposed on the road-crossing. He who steals a man
should he fined the highest amercement; he who steals a woman should
have his entire property confiscated; and he who steals a maiden shall
he put to death.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 318).—‘For stealing a king’s son, the fine is
108 *kārṣāpaṇas*, or corporal punishment; half of that for stealing
persons of the royal family, or of men and women in general.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 101).—‘If one forcibly confines, or forcibly releases,
a man or woman, he shall be fined not less than 500 or more than 1,000
*Paṇas*, *i.e*., the highest amercement.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र ह्रियमाणहर्तृजातिगुणापेक्षया विधिप्रपञ्चः कल्पनीयः॥ ८.३२२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

323	For stealing men of noble family and especially women and the most precious gems, (the offender) deserves corporal (or capital) punishment.
</details>
