+++
title = "329 अन्येषाञ् चैवम्-आदीनाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of the theft of yarns, cotton, fermenting drug, cowdung, molasses, curds, milk, skimmed curd, water and grass (326),—of vessels made of bamboo or cane, as also of salts, earthenware, earth and ashes (327)—of fish, birds, oil, clarified butter, meat, honey, and other animal-products (328)—of other things of this kind, spirituous liquors, cooked rice and all kinds of cooked food,—the fine shall be double the value of the thing (stolen).—(326-329)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सूत्रम्** ऊर्णासणादि । **लवणानि** सैन्धवबिडलवणादीनि । **यच् चान्यत् पशुसंभवम्** आमिषादि[^८६] । **अन्येषाम्** अपूपमोदकादीनाम् । **आदि**शब्दः प्रकारे । प्रकारः सादृश्यं तुल्यता सदृशकार्यकरणोपयोगादिरूपा । तथा च सर्पिर्मण्डेक्षुखण्डशर्कराकिलाटकूर्चिकाद्या अपूपा गृह्यन्ते । **पशुसंभवं** राङ्कवाजिनाद्य् अपीच्छन्ति <u>केचित्</u> । **आदि**ग्रहणात् प्रकृतिर् विकृतिर् अपि ।[^८७] यच् चोभयोपादानं दध्नः क्षीरस्य चेति तद् उदाहरणार्थम् । एवं **सूत्र**ग्रहणेन सूत्रमयं वासो ऽपि गृह्यते । नलिकादीनां सत्य् अपि सूत्रमयत्वे पशुसंभवत्व उत्तमत्वाद् उत्तमानां चेत्य् अस्यापवादविषयः[^८८] । प्रकृत्यन्तरे तैलशब्दः स्नेहवाची, न तिलविकार एव । तेनातसीप्रियङ्गुपञ्चाङ्गुलतैलादयो ऽपि गृह्यन्ते ॥ ८.३२६–२९ ॥


[^८८]:
M G DK: ayam apavādaviṣayaḥ


[^८७]:
M G add: prakṛtiṃ


[^८६]:
M G: āmiṣāditi
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.326-329)  
**

‘*Yarns*’—woolen, jute and so forth.

‘*Salts*,’—rock-salt, black salt, and so forth.

‘*Other animal-products*’—the flesh, etc.

Other kinds of ‘*cooked food*’—such as sweet bread, sweetmeats, etc. The
term ‘*ādi*’ means *kinds*, kinship consisting in *similarity*,
*equality*, *similar utility*. It is in this sense that butter, gruel,
sugar-candy, sugar, coagulated milk, inspissated milk and so forth
become included. The term ‘*animal-products*.’ according to some,
includes the wool, the skin and so forth.

‘*And be forth*’—includes the products of the things mentioned; and as
an example of this, the text has mentioned both ‘curd’ and ‘milk.’

Similarly ‘*yarn*’ includes also cloth made from yarns.

As for the ‘*nalikā*’ and such things, even though they are made up of
yarns, and are ‘animal-products,’—yet, being already included under
‘fine clothes’ (verse 321), they are to be excluded from the present
verse.

The term ‘*taila*’ here stands for *oils* in general,—and not for the
*oil of* ‘*tila*,’ *sesamum*, only, as its derivation suggests. So that
the oils of *linseed*, *Priyaṅgu*, *cardamom* and other things also
become included.—(326-329)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.326-329)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Vīvādaratnākara* (p. 326), which adds the
following notes:—*Anyeṣāmevamādīnām*’, *i.e*., pastries and the
like,—‘*anyat paśusambhavām*’, skins, tusks and so forth;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 989);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 140),
which says that this refers to the case of the theft of small quantities
of yarn; and such as have been made ready for use.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.326-331)**

*Viṣṇu* (5.83-86).—‘A stealer of thread, cotton, cow-dung, sugar, sour
milk, milk, butter-milk, grass, salt, clay, ashes, birds, fish,
clarified butter, oil, meat, honey, basket-work, split bamboo,
earthenware, or iron pots, shall pay three times its value as fine;—the
same fine is ordained for dressed food. For stealing flowers, green
grain, shrubs, creepers, climbing plants or leaves, the fine is 5
*kṛṣṇalas*;—the same for stealing pot herbs, roots or fruits.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 22-24).—‘For stealing wood, cane, grass and the like,
earthenware-utensils, bamboo, utensils made of bamboos, rattan, bone,
leather, vegetables, green roots, grass, flowers, cow-milk, molasses,
salt, oil, cooked food, dressed food spirituous liquor, flesh, and other
objects of small value, a fine five times the value of the article shall
be levied.’

*Bṛahspati* (22.20).—‘When a man takes grass, wood, flowers, or fruit,
without permission of the owner, he deserves to have a hand cut off.’

Do. (22.25).—‘He who destroys or takes away implements of husbandry, an
embankment or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be fined a hundred *paṇas,
or* more according to the nature of the offence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.275).—‘For stealing articles trifling, mediocre or
large, the punishment shall he in accordance with the value of the
article stolen; and in the inflicting of punishments, the King shall
take into consideration the time, the place and also the age and
capacity of the offender.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 848).—‘If a non-Brāhmaṇa steals, either
forcibly or unintentionally, any of the following articles belonging to
a Brāhmaṇa, he shall have his hand cutoff:—sacrificial fuel, clarified
butter, fire-wood, grass, fodder, flower, incense, fruits; if any one is
actually caught in the act of stealing kuśa-grass, leather-vessels, or
the Agnihotra-implements, his limb shall be cut off; hut if he is found
out afterwards, he shall be made to ride a donkey if he is a Brāhmaṇa,
and shall have his head shaven.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 325).—‘One who steals trifling and mediocre
articles, or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be made to pay double the
value of the article, or a fine of five *kṛṣṇalas*.’

Do. (p. 328).—‘For stealing things of small value or milk or
milk-products, the stealer should ho made to pay to the owner the value
of the thing, and to the King a fine double the said value.’

*Gautama* (Do.).—‘Five *kṛṣṇalas* for the stealing of fruits, green
grains or vegetables.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 327).—‘For the stealing of dressed wood,
stone, earthenware, vessels made of leather or cane, the fine shall be
either five times the value of the article stolen, or three
*kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 100).—‘For stealing flowers, fruits, vegetables,
roots, cooked food, vessels of leather, bamboo or earthenware, or other
trifling things, the fine shall be not less than 12, or more than 24
*Paṇas*. For stealing articles made of iron, wood or ropes,—or of small
animals, clothes and such things, or large objects, the fine shall be
not less than 24, or more than 40 *Paṇas*; for stealing vessels made of
copper, *vṛtta* (?), bell-metal, glass or ivory, the fine shall be not
less than 48 or more than 90 *Paṇas*, *i.e*., the first amercement.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अथोक्तानां द्रव्याणां मूल्याद् द्विगुणो दमश् चतुर्भिः श्लोकैर् उच्यते । सूत्रादिश्लोकगणे चात्र यद् भस्मनो मृदश् च ग्रहणं तत्सर्वप्रदर्शनार्थं विज्ञयते । तथा च निगमयति "अन्येषां चैवमादीनाम्" इति ॥ ८.३२५–२८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

329	Or other things of a similar kind, spirituous liquor, boiled rice, and every kind of cooked food, the fine (shall be) twice the value (of the stolen article).
</details>
