+++
title = "332 स्यात् साहसम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the act is committed with violence and in the presence of men, it is ‘robbery’; it is ‘theft’ when done in the absence of men, and when it is denied after having been done.—(332)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

परद्रव्यापहरणं **स्तेयम्** उच्यते । धात्वर्थप्रसिद्ध्या चास्यैव कर्ता स्तेनः ।[^९८] इह तु विशेषेणायं व्यवहार इष्यते तदर्थो ऽयं श्लोकः । न परद्रव्यादानमात्रं स्तेयम्, ऋणादाननिक्षेपादिष्व् अपि स्तेयदण्डप्रसङ्गात् । संज्ञाभेदो दण्डभेदार्थः ।[^९९] 


[^९९]:
     M G add: apahnutya yat tena mayā kṛtam ity āha


[^९८]:
     M G DK (1:1691) add: tasya kartavyena

**कर्म यत् कृतं** परपीडाकरं वस्त्रोत्पाटनाग्निदाहद्रव्यापहर्णादि[^१००] । अग्निदाहे यद्य् अपि द्रव्यापहरणं नास्ति तथापि चौर्यम् एव रहसि करणाद् अपह्नवाच् च मन्यन्ते । चौर्ये हि द्रव्यविशेषाश्रयो दण्डः । सो ऽत्र न स्यात् । एवमर्थम् एव स्तेयप्रकरणोत्कर्षणम्[^१०१] ।[^१०२] **प्रसभं कर्म** इति कर्मग्रहणाद् द्रव्यापहाराद् अन्यद् अप्य् एवंकृतम् अयुक्तं साहसम् एव । कस् तर्ह्य् अग्निदाहादाव् अप्रसभं कृते दण्डः । कण्टकशुद्धौ वक्ष्यामः । अत एव संधिछेदे[^१०३] ऽसत्य् अपि द्रव्यापहरणे कण्टकशुद्धौ दण्डम् आमनन्ति । अन्यथा स्तेय एवावक्ष्यत्[^१०४] ॥ ८.३३२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The taking away of what belongs to another is called ‘theft’; and on
account of the denotation, of the root from which the word is derived,
one who commits ‘theft’ is a ‘thief.’ But for cases of a particular kind
of theft, special provisions have been made; that is why we have the
present texts. In fact merely ‘taking what belongs to another’ cannot be
‘theft,’ because if it were, then in cases of debts and deposits also,
punishments for ‘theft’ would have to be inflicted. The present texts
have used a different name (‘*sāhasa*,’ ‘robbery,’ in place of
‘*steya*,’ ‘theft’) with a view to laying down different forms of
punishment.

‘*Is denied*,’—*i.e*., having done the act, the man says ‘I have not
done it.’

‘*The act is committed*’—such as causes pain to others, *e.g*., tearing
clothes, setting (ire, taking away property and so forth. In the case of
‘setting fire,’ though there is no ‘taking away of property,’ yet it is
regarded as ‘theft,’ because it is done secretly, and denied afterwards.
But in cases of ‘theft,’ the punishment is determined by the nature of
the article stolen; this would, therefore, not be applicable to the case
of ‘setting fire.’ It is for this reason that the present section has
been separated from that on ‘Theft.’

‘*Act done with violence*’;—since the text mentions ‘act’ in general,
acts other than ‘the taking away of other’s property’ also, when clone
with violence, would come under ‘robbery.’

“What punishment could there be in the case of the setting of fire, and
such acts, when clone *without violence*?”

This we shall explain under the section on ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’

It is for this reason that, in a case where a house has been broken
into, but nothing stolen, they declare the punishment to be what is laid
down under ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’ Otherwise, this should have come
under ‘*Theft*’ itself.—(332)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ata eva sandhicchede* & c.’ (Medhātithi, p. 1069, l. 10)—See Manu
9.276.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 298), which
adds the following explanatory notes:—When the misappropriation of
other’s property is done openly by force, even in the presence of
watchmen and the king’s officers, then it is ‘*Sāhasa*’,
*robbery*,—‘theft’ consists in misappropriating secretly during absence,
or by fraud;—and when the man, after avoiding the king’s officers and
taking away the property, subsequently through fear, hides it, then also
it is a case of ‘theft.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 286), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*’ in the presence of the men guarding
it,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force;—*i.e*., it is ‘robbery’ when the
misappropriation is done without any attempt at
concealment;—‘*apavyayate*’ hides, denies;—wherever there is
misappropriation, it is ‘theft,’ which is of two kinds—(1) done in the
absence of watchmen, and (2) done even in the presence of the watchman,
but afterwards hidden.

The same work quotes it again on p. 350 where it adds the following
explanation:—When the property is taken away in the presence of the
watchman, this is what is called ‘*sānvaya apahāra*,’ which is
*robbery*, but where it is taken away in the absence of the watchman,
and then denied, it is *theft*.

It is quoted in ‘*Mitākṣārā*,’ (2.266), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*,’ in the presence of the guardians of the property,
the state officials and others,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force—where another’s
property is taken away—it is called ‘robbery different from this is
‘theft,’ which is ‘*niranvaya*’—*i.e*., done either in the absence of
the guardians of property and others, or through fraud;—and whenever the
act, though committed in the presence of these persons, is concealed
through fear, this also is ‘theft’ *Bālambhaṭṭī* has declared
‘*kṛtvāpavyayate ca yat*’ to be the generally accepted reading, and
explains it as ‘conceals.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 329), which explains ‘*anvayavat*’
as ‘before the owner’s eyes,’ and ‘*niranvayam*’ as ‘behind the owner’s
back’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 150b), which adds the same
explanation and adds that even in cases of robbery, if the accused
denies the act in the court, it becomes a case of ‘theft.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.230).—‘The forcible taking away of what does not belong
exclusively to one has been called *Robbery*. The penalty in this case
consists of a fine double the value of the article; if the robbery is
denied, it shall he four times that value.’

*Bṛhaspati* (28.2 *et* *seq*.).—‘Stealers are of two kinds—open
(robbers) and secret (thieves); fraudulent traders, quacks, gamblers,
dishonest judges, bribe-takers, cheats, persons pretending to interpret
omens, or to practise propitiatory rites, low artists, forgers, hired
servants refusing to work, dishonest umpires, perjured witnesses and
jugglers—these are *open* stealers.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.24).—‘Robbery is declared to be threefold as it may be
of the lowest, middling or highest kind; the punishment in each case
should also be of the lowest, middling or highest sort, according to the
nature of the article.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 1 *et seq*.).—‘Two kinds of robbers stealing the goods
of others have to he distinguished—the one kind, open and the other kind
concealed. Open robbers are those who forge measures and weights,
receivers of bribes, robbers, gamblers, public prostitutes, those who go
about in disguise, etc., etc.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 100).—‘The taking away of an article, if accompanied
by force, is called *Robbery*,— if not accompanied by force,
*Theft*,—also when the act is denied.

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 287).—‘When a thing is taken away
forcibly, in the presence of watchmen, it is *sāhasa*, Robbery; if it is
done secretly, it is *steya*, Theft.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यत् सारक्षं **प्रसभम्** अविसङ्कितेन क्रियते तत् साहसम् । **निरन्वयं** तु यद् अनधिष्ठितम् आरक्षे तन् न स्तेयम् । यच् च **सान्वयम्** अपि कृत्वापव्ययते तद् अपि स्तेयम् एव ॥ ८.३३१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

332	An offence (of this description), which is committed in the presence (of the owner) and with violence, will be robbery; if (it is committed) in his absence, it will be theft; likewise if (the possession of) anything is denied after it has been taken.
</details>
