+++
title = "338 ब्राह्मणस्य चतुःषष्टिः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of theft, the guilt of a Śūdra is eightfold, that of the Vaiśya sixteen-fold, and that of the Kṣatriya thirty-two-fold;—(337) that of the Brāhmaṇa sixty-four-fold, or fully hundred-fold, or twice sixty-four-fold; when he is cognisant of the good or bad quality of the act.—(338)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तद्दोषगुणविद् धि स** इति हेत्वभिधानाद् विदुषां दण्डो ऽयम् । यत्र खलजन एकं कार्षापणं दाप्यते तत्र विद्वान्[^१२२] शूद्रो ऽष्टगुणाम् । **अष्टभिः आपाद्यते** संबध्यते यत् **किल्बिषं** पापं तद् एवम् उच्यते । अष्टभिर् वापाद्यत आहन्यते गुण्यत इति यावत्, उभयथाप्य् अष्टगुणस्य वाचको **ऽष्टापद्य**शब्दः । एवं तद् एव द्विगुणं वैश्यस्य । स हि साक्षाद् अध्ययनज्ञानयोर् अधिकृतः । शूद्रस् तु कथंचिद् ब्राह्मणापाश्रिततत्संगत्या कियद् अपि ज्ञास्यति । क्षत्रियस् तु रक्षाधिकारदोषेण समाने विद्वत्त्वे ततो ऽपि द्विगुणं दण्ड्यते । ब्राह्मणे तु दण्डविधौ न तृप्यति । चतुःषष्टिः शतम्[^१२३] अष्टविंशं वा शतम्[^१२४] इति । तस्य हि प्रवचनम् उपदेष्टृत्वं वा, अधिकं च रक्षा[^१२५] ततो भवेत् । प्राकृतजनस्य तिर्यक्प्रख्यस्य को ऽपराधः[^१२६] । अविद्वांसो गुणदोषानभिज्ञा अकार्ये प्रवर्तन्ते । विद्वान् अपि तथैव चेद् वर्तेत हन्त हतं[^१२७] जगत्, तृतीयस्य शिक्षितुर् अभावात् । तद् उक्तं "द्वौ लोके[^१२८] धृतव्रतौ[^१२९] राजा ब्राह्मणश् च बहुश्रुतः" (ग्ध् ८.१) इति । राज्ञः पूर्वेण दण्डाधिक्यम् अनेन ब्राह्मणस्य । आधिक्यमात्राविधिश् चायं न यथाश्रुतसंख्याविधिः, ब्राह्मणदण्डे ऽनवस्थाश्रवणाद् अयं वायं वेति[^१३०] । न च विकल्पो युक्तो व्यवस्थाहेतुत्वाभावात् । तुल्यबलस्यैव विकल्पस्य परविषयाश्रयानुपपत्तेः[^१३१] । को हि राजा द्विजगुणम् उत्सृज्य चतुःषष्टिं ग्रहीष्यति । यदि परमदृष्टार्थे दण्डे[^१३२] विकल्पः, उपपद्येत । न चादृष्टार्थो ऽयम् इत्य् उक्तम् । तथा च गौतमः "विदुषो ऽतिक्रमे[^१३३] दण्डभूयस्त्वम्" इत्य् आह । तस्माद् अनवस्था विधित्वं व्याहरन्ति । न च गुणापेक्षो विकल्पो युक्तो नष्टादिश्लोकेनैव (म्ध् ८.२३२) विद्धत्वात् । अर्थवत्त्वाच्[^१३४] चात्र विध्यगतिः । स चाधिक्यविधौ लब्धालंबन इति न यथाश्रुतपरिकल्पने विकल्पने समर्थः ॥ ८.३३७–३८ ॥


[^१३४]:
M G DK: arthavādāc


[^१३३]:
M G J: 'tikrama-


[^१३२]:
J: paramadṛṣṭārtho daṇḍo


[^१३१]:
M G DK: tulyabalasyaiva viṣayasyānupapatteḥ


[^१३०]:
M G: ceti


[^१२९]:
J: dvau lokaviśrutau


[^१२८]:
M G: lokau


[^१२७]:
M G: hanta


[^१२६]:
M G: -prakhyasyāparādhaḥ


[^१२५]:
J: vādhikaṃ ca — yato rakṣā


[^१२४]:
DK (1: 1721): aṣṭaviṃśādhikaśatam


[^१२३]:
M G J: catuḥṣaṣṭiśatam


[^१२२]:
M G: tatrāvidvān
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)**

‘*When he is cognisant of the good or bad quality of the act*’;—this
points out the reason for what is here laid down; and from this it is
clear that the penalty here prescribed is meant for the educated. Thus
then, if for a guilt an ordinary man is fined one ‘*Kārṣāpaṇa*,’ the
learned *Śūdra* incurs the ‘*eight-fold guilt*;’—that is, that which is
connected with the number ‘eight,’ or that which is folded, multiplied,
eight times. In either case the term ‘*eight-fold*’ means that the
educated Śūdra’s guilt is eight times that of the ordinary man.

That of the *Vaiśya* is double that of the *Śūdra*; since he is himself
entitled to study the Veda and acquire the necessary knowledge, while
the *Śūdra* can learn only a little through serving or associating with
the *Brāhmam*.

As for the *Kṣatriya*, though, in the point of knowledge, he stands on
the same footing as the *Vaiśya*, yet, in as much as the protecting of
people forms part of his duty, his guilt is double that of the *Vaiśya*.

As regards the *Brāhmaṇa*, the author cannot be content with prescribing
any amount of penalty,—‘*sixty-four*,—*hundred,—hundred and
twenty-eight*.’ Since it is his duty to expound the duties of men and
instruct them, and thus guard them against evil.

What blame can attach to the common man, who is on the same level as the
lower animals? Uneducated men cannot know the good or bad character of
actions, and hence they are led to do what should not he done. If,
however, the educated men were also to behave in the same manner, then
alas! the world would be doomed! As there would be no third man to teach
men their duty,—it having been declared that—‘only two men are known in
the world—the King and the learned Brāhmaṇa.’ For the king, a heavy
punishment having been already prescribed in the preceding verse, the
present verse lays it down for the Brāhmaṇa.

Thus all that the present verse enjoins is *heavier punishment* (for the
Brāhmaṇa), and the exact numbers are not to be taken literally. Because
so far as the Brāhmaṇa is concerned, it has been declared that there can
be no limit to his punishment. Nor would it be right to lay down any
option—‘this or that’—in this case \[as it would be if the words were
taken literally \]; as there would be nothing to determine which of them
it should be in any particular case; since both the options being
equally authoritative, it would be impossible to find any case in which
the lower penalty could be imposed. What king is there, for instance,
who would accept only a sixty-four-fold fine, and give up one the double
of that figure? Further, one would have been admissible in the case only
if punishments were meant to serve a transcendental purpose; as a matter
of fact however, they are not meant to serve any transcendental purpose,
as we have already explained. Says Gautama (12.17)—‘For the educated
there should be heavier punishment.’ For these reasons the very
indefiniteness of the assertion deprives it of injunctive force. Nor
would it he right to take the option as determined by the qualifications
of the culprit; as this has been already laid down under verse 232, *et
seq*.

Further, the fact of the present passage being an injunction is
indicated by the purpose served by it; and as that purpose is served by
its being taken as prescribing *heavier punishment* in general, there
can be no justification for its being taken literally and hence laying
down options.—(337-338).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)**

These verses are quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275), in support of the view
that the fine imposed for theft should vary with the caste of the thief;
whereon *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes two different readings (see Note I);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 302):—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (342),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Aṣṭāpādyam*’ means ‘multiplied eight
times,’—‘*kilviṣam*,’ the amount of fine imposed as punishment; the
meaning thus is that the fine to be imposed upon a *learned śūdra*
should be eight times that on an *ignorant śūdra*; similarly in the case
of the Vaiśya and others also;—for the Brāhmaṇa the fine is to be either
full one hundred, or twice 64;—the reason for this is
‘*taddoṣaguṇaviddhi saḥ*,’—‘because the Brāhmaṇa is fully cognisant of
the evil character of theft—thus the fact of the culprit being cognisant
of the evil being a ground for enhanced penalty in the case of the
Brāhmaṇa, the same principle is to be applied to the case of the Śūdra
and others also. That offence for which the legal penalty for the Śūdra,
is *one*, for the Vaiśya, the Kṣatriya and the Brāhmaṇa, it should be
double the amount of the preceding; so that the penalty for the
*ignorant* Śūdra being one, that of the *learned* Śūdra is *eight
times*—aṇd that of the learned Vaiśya 16, the learned Kṣatriya 32 and
the learned Brāhmaṇa 64 times.

These are quoted also in *Prāyaścittāviveka* (p, 348), which says that
all that is meant is to deprecate the act, and to show that the gravity
of the offence is in proportion to the caste of the delinquent;—it
explains ‘*aṣṭāpādyam*’ as ‘that which is multiplied by *eight*;
*aṣṭābhiḥ āpadyate guṇyate iti*,’—the single unit being meant for those
lower than the Śūdra;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 144), which attributes
them to Yājñavalkya, and says that ‘*taddoṣaguṇavit*’ is to be construed
all through; so that the meaning is that the fine in the case of the
Śūdra who is cognisant of the seriousness of the offence is to be eight
times that of the ignorant man, and so on, the fine varying with the
qualifications of the offender.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)  
**

*Gautama* (12.15-17).—‘The value of property which a Śūdra unrighteously
acquires by theft, must be repaid eightfold;—for each of the other
castes, the fine shall be doubled; if a learned man offends, the
punishment shall be very much enhanced.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 51-52).—‘In theft, the crime of the *Śūdra* is eight
times (that of the lowest caste); of the *Vaiśya*, sixteen-fold; of the
*Kṣatriya*, thirty-two-fold; of the Brāhmaṇa sixty-four-fold—Knowledge
also makes a difference; for knowing persons, the punishment is
specially severe.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उक्तशेषाणां च द्रव्याणाम् अपहरणे एष दण्डः स्यात् । एतेषाम् एव वा स्तेयाभ्यासे सुवर्ण[स्तेये वा । विदुषो ऽतिर]मे दण्डभूयस्त्वम् । एवं राज्ञो ऽपि स्यात् । तथायं पूर्वशेषत्वाद् अर्थवाद एष, न दण्डविधिः । यदि चास्यार्थवादत्वं भवति ततो वाग्दण्डपारुष्यादिषु [यत् यत्] दण्डालपत्वम् उक्तं तत् समञ्जसं भवति । अथ श्रुतिसामर्थ्याद् यथोपदेशम् अयं दण्डविकल्प इष्यते, यथा प्रकाशरहस्यप्रायश्चित्तेषु ततो ऽस्य विधित्वम् । एवं च सति ब्राह्मणदण्डविकल्पश् च वृद्धस्वाध्याय्यपक्षया (?) वेदितव्यः, यथान्यत्र । स्तेयापवादार्थं त्व् इदम् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ८.३३७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

338	That of a Brahmana sixty-fourfold, or quite a hundredfold, or (even) twice four-and-sixtyfold; (each of them) knowing the nature of the offence.
</details>
