+++
title = "350 गुरुं वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Without hesitation one should strike an approaching desperado,—be he a preceptor, a child, or an aged man, or a highly learned Brāhmaṇa.—(350)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आततायी** उच्यते यः शरीरधनदारपुत्रनाशे सर्वप्रकारम् उद्यतः । तम् **अविचारयन्**[^१७४] हन्यात् । **गुर्व्**आदिग्रहणम् अर्थवादः । एते ऽपि हन्तव्याः, किम् उतान्य इति । एतेषां त्व् आततायित्वे ऽपि वधो नास्ति । "आचार्यं च प्रवक्तारम्" (म्ध् ४.१६२) इत्य् अनेनापकारिणाम् अपि वधो निषिद्धः । **गुरुम् आततायिनम्** इति शक्यः संबन्धः । तथा सत्य् आततायिविशेषणम् एतत् । ततो गुर्वादिव्यतिरिक्तस्याततायिनः प्रतिषेधः कुतः स्यात् । वाक्यान्तराभावात् । 


[^१७४]:
     M G add: na vicārayet; DK (1: 1625) add: na vicārayan

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अथ</u> "नाततायिवधे दोषः" (म्ध् ८.३५१) इत्य् एतद् वाक्यान्तरं सामान्येनाभ्यनुज्ञापकम् इति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">तद् अपि न</u>, विधेर् अश्रवणात्, पूर्वशेषतया चार्थवादत्वे प्रकृतवचनत्वात् । 

- इह भवन्तस्[^१७५] त्व् आहुः- यद्य् आततायिनम्[^१७६] इत्य् एव विधिः, अवशिष्टो ऽर्थवादः, तथापि गुर्वादीनां वधानुज्ञानम् । यतो ऽन्यद् अपकारित्वम् अन्यद् आततायित्वम् । यो ह्य् अन्यां कांचन पीडां करोति न सर्वेण शरीरादिना सो ऽपकारी, ततस् त्व् अन्य[^१७७] आततायी[^१७८] । तथा च पठ्यते ।


[^१७८]:
     M G: karoti sa sarveṇa śarīrādinā steyakārītas tv ātatāyī; DK: 


[^१७७]:
     DK omits: anya


[^१७६]:
     M G: yad yathātatāyinam


[^१७५]:
     M G: bhavatāṃs

- उद्यतासिर् विषाग्निभ्यां शापोद्यतकरस् तथा ।

- आथर्वणेन हन्ता च पिशुनश् चापि राजतः ॥

- भार्यातिक्रमकारी च रन्धान्वेषणतत्परः ।

- एवमाद्यान् विजानीयात् सर्वान् एवाततायिनः ॥ (क्स्म् ८०२–०३)

****"**<u>आयान्तम् इति</u>** वचनाद् आत्तशस्त्रो हन्तुम् अभिधावन् दारान् वा जिहीर्षन् हन्तव्यः । कृते तु दोषे किम् अन्यत् करिष्यतीत्य् उपेक्षा" इति ब्रुवते ।

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । यतः "प्रकाशम् अप्रकाशं वा"[^१७९] (म्ध् ८.३५१) इति वक्ष्यति । समानौ ह्य् एतौ करिष्यन् कृतवांश् च[^१८०] । तस्माद् **आयान्तम्** इत्य् अनुवादः- कर्तुम् आगतं कृत्वा वा गतम् इति । आततायित्वाच् चासौ हन्यते । न च कृतवचन आततायित्वम् उपैति । नास्यात्मनो रक्षार्थ एव वध "आत्मनश् च परित्राणे" (म्ध् ८.३४९) इति अनेनोक्तम्[^१८१] ॥ ८.३५० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author further points out that in one’s own defence a man should
always fight.

That man is called a ‘*desperado*’ who is intent upon destroying one’s
body, property, wife or children. Such a man one ‘*should strike without
hesitation*.’

The mention of the ‘*preceptor*’ and the rest is purely by way of a
commendatory declamation; the sense being—‘when even such persons
deserve to be struck, what of others?’ As a matter of fact, in the case
of the persons named, there is to be no killing, even though they be
desperados; since from what has been said under the text—‘He shall never
offend the teacher who explained the Veda, etc.’ (4.162)—it is clear
that the striking of the preceptor is forbidden, even if he do harm.

It may be possible to construe the term ‘*gurum*’ with
‘*ālatāyinam*’;—hut in that case the two terms would mean ‘the great
desperado’; so that the striking of desperados who are not ‘great’ would
become precluded;—why?—because there is no other text (that would enjoin
*striking* in their case).

“But there is the next verse—‘there is no sin in killing a desperado,’
which permits the killing of all desperados in general.”

Not so; because we do not find any injunctive word in the next verse,
which, on that account is best taken as a declamatory supplement to the
previous injunction (contained in the present verse).

The revered teachers have declared as follows:—Though, in reality, the
injunction contained in the text is that ‘one should strike the
desperado,’ and all the rest is merely declamatory,—yet it has to be
taken as sanctioning the striking of the preceptor and other persons
mentioned. Because the mere ‘malefactor’ (who is mentioned in 4.162, as
not to be offended) is something quite different from the
‘desperado’;—one who inflicts an ordinary injury, which does not involve
any serious harm to the body, etc., is the ‘malefactor’; while the
‘desperado’ is something totally different;—being described in the
following words.—‘Ho who has lifted the sword, who is going to strike
with poison or Are, who has raised his hands for the purpose of
pronouncing a curse, who is going to kill by means of magic spells, who
backbites against one to the king, who violates one’s wife, who is ever
intent upon finding fault with one,—all these should be regarded as
*desperados*?

Some people hold that—“from the use of the word ‘*approaching*’ in the
text it would seem that the person who is rushing forward with uplifted
sword, with a view to strike him, or one who is *going to* take away his
wife, should be struck;—but when the injury has *been done*, he should
ignore it.”

But this is not right; since in the next verse we find the phrase
‘*openly or secretly*,’ from which it is clear that the man who *has
done* the harm, and he who is *going to do it*, both stand on the same
footing. Hence the term ‘*approaching*’ must be taken as purely
descriptive; whether he ‘approaches’ *for doing harm*, or *after having
done harm*,—he is to be struck, because he is a ‘*desperado*; for the
mere fact of his *having done* the act does not deprive him of the
character of a ‘desperado.’ Further, the present text does not sanction
the *striking* in one’s own defence only (in which case alone the
above-mentioned meaning of the epithet would be applicable); since that
has been already provided for in the foregoing verse.—(350)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Kullūka the condition is that one must be unable to save
one self by fight;—according to Nārāyaṇa one must not wound such a man
excessively.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 784), which adds the
following explanation:—‘When even the Teacher and the rest, if they are
assassins, may be slain—what to say of others;’—which only means that
there is nothing wrong in the slaying of assassins other than the
Teacher and the rest; it is not meant that these latter are to be slain;
because we have the general prohibition that ‘no Brāhmaṇa shall be
killed.’

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 104);—in *Aparārka* (p. 627, and
again at p. 1043);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*—(p. 1011);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 59), which says that ‘*eva*’ has been added for
the purpose of emphasis;—and in *Nītimayūkha* (p. 77).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.350-351)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.15-18). ‘They declare that the slayer commits no crime by
slaying an assassin. They quote the following:—“An incendiary, a
poisoner, one raising a weapon to strike, a robber, one who forcibly
takes away land, abductor of another man’s wife,—these six are called
Ātatāyin, *Assassins*. One may slay an assassin who comes with the
intention of killing, even though he may be knowing the whole Veda along
with the Upaniṣads; by that act one does not incur the guilt of
Brāhmaṇa-slaughter. He who slays an assassin learned in the Veda and
belonging to a noble family, does not incur, by that act, the guilt of
murdering a learned Brāhmaṇa; as this is a case of fury recoiling on
fury.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1-18.11-13).—‘One should not fight with......
Brāhmaṇas,—excepting assassins. They quote the following—“He who slays
an assassin, who is able to expound the Veda and born in a noble family,
does not, by that act, incur the guilt of killing a learned Brāhmaṇa;
this being a case of fury recoiling on fury.”’

*Viṣṇu* (5.189-192).—‘Any man may unhesitatingly slay a man who attacks
him with the intent to murder him, whether he be his spiritual teacher,
young or old, or a Brāhmaṇa, or even a Brāhmaṇa versed in many branches
of sacred knowledge. By killing an assassin who attempts to kill,
whether in public or in private, no crime is committed by the
slayer—fury recoils on fury. Assassins are of seven kinds—such as try to
kill by the sword, or with poison, or with fire, such as raise their
hand to pronounce a curse, such as recite a deadly incantation from the
Atharva Veda, such as raise a false accusation reaching the ears of the
King, and such as have illicit intercourse with another man’s wife. The
same designation is given to other evil-doers who deprive others of
their reputation or of their wealth, or who destroy religious merit by
ruining pools and such things or property.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 1042).—‘Or an assassin advancing to strike one,
even though he be fully learned in the Veda, if one strikes him, one
does not incur the sin of Brāhmaṇa-killing. The following are to be
regarded as assassins:—one raising the sword to strike, one going to
administer fire or poison, one raising his hand to curse, one killing
with magic rites, one back-biting to the King, one wresting another
man’s wife.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘If one reviles on being reviled, or strikes on being
struck, or kills one who is advancing to kill, one does not commit any
offence.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"आचार्यं च प्रवक्तारं पितरं मातरं गुरुम्" इत्य् एवमादिभिः शास्त्रैर् अत्यन्तापकारिणो ऽप्य् एते गुर्वादयो न वध्याः इत्य् उक्तं यतः इदं पूर्वविध्यर्थव्[आदार्थम् । गु]र्वादयो ऽप्य् आततायिनो ऽनेन निमित्तेन वध्याः स्युर् अत्यन्तावध्याः सन्तः, किं पुनस् तेभ्यो ऽन्य इत्य् अतिशयार्थवादो यथा लोके ॥ ८.३४९ ॥

_तथा चेदम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

350	One may slay without hesitation an assassin who approaches (with murderous intent), whether (he be one's) teacher, a child or an aged man, or a Brahmana deeply versed in the Vedas.
</details>
