+++
title = "354 परस्य पत्न्या"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A man who engages in secret conversation with the wife of another person,—if he is one who has been previously accused of similar offences,—should receive the penalty of the ‘first amercement.’—(354)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**संभाषः** संभाषणम्, तम् आलापं **योजयन्** कुर्वन्[^१८९] संग्रहणादिदोषैः तत्स्त्रीप्रार्थनादिभिः[^१९०] पूर्वम् **आक्षारितो** ऽभिशस्तः, "अयम् एनाम् उपजपति" इत्य् अमुत्र दृष्टदोषः शङ्क्यमानदोषो वा चपलः, रहः उद्वातादौ निषिद्धसंभाषण इति <u>केचित्</u> [^१९१]। कारणाद् अप्य् अन्यपत्न्या संभाषणं कुर्वन् **प्रथमसाहसं** दण्डं **प्राप्नुयाद्** दापयितव्य इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.३५४ ॥


[^१९१]:
     M G: ākṣārito 'bhisaṃbhavām eva patnyā tasyāmutrādṛṣṭadoṣaḥ capala udvātādau niṣiddhasaṃbhāṣaṇa iti kecit


[^१९०]:
     M G: saṃgrahaṇād doṣe tatstrīprārthanād iti


[^१८९]:
     M G: tam ālapituṃ kurvan; DK: tatstriyā ālāpaṃ kurvan
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Conversation*’—talking; one who is found to be doing this;—if he
happens to be one who has been ‘*previously accused of*’—blamed for
committing—‘*such offences*’—of having a love-intrigue with that
woman,—*i.e*., if the man is of unsteady character, and has been already
seen to be carrying on an intrigue with her,—or has been suspected of
doing so;—‘*secretly*,’—in some secret place, or (as some people
explain) in a place where such conversation is forbidden;—in the case of
such a person, even if the conversation held with another’s wife be one
bearing upon some business, be should be made to pay the ‘*first
amercement*.’—(354)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 854);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
384), which addṣ the following notes:—‘*Pūrvamakṣāritaḥ*’, already
previously suspected of entertaining longings for that lady;—the
punishment is to be inflicted only in a case where the conversation is
not held under circumstances unfavourable to intercourse;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a), which explains ‘*doṣaiḥ*’ as
‘tendency to run after women,’ and adds that this refers to cases where
the conversation is held with evil intentions.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106), as laying down the penalty
for a man of wicked character holding conversation with another man’s
wife;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 172), which explains the meaning to
be that ‘if a man who has been once suspected of illicit connection with
a woman should meet her in private and talk to her longer than ordinary
courtesy demands, he should be punished with the first amercement.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.354-355)**

*Āpastamba* (2-26.18-19).—‘A young man who, decked with ornaments,
enters unintentionally a place where a married woman or a maiden sits,
must be reprimanded;—if he does it intentionally, with an evil purpose,
ho must he fined.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.284).—‘If a man converses with a woman at improper
times or places,—or if he sits with her on the same seat,—this is
*Adultery* .’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.285).—‘If a man converses with a woman who has been
previously forbidden to do so, the woman shall pay a fine of one hundred
and the man of two hundred;—if both have been previously forbidden, the
punishment shall be the same as in the case of Adultery.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 854).—‘Conversing with a woman at improper times
or places, or in a forest,—winking at her and smiling at her,—these
constitute the first degree of Adultery.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 855).—[(See under
CCCLII-CCCLIII.)]

*Nārada* (12-62).—‘To meet another man’s wife at an unreasonable hour or
place, and to sit, converse or dally with her,—these are the three
grades of Adultery.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.7).—‘Sending perfumes, garlands, fruits, wine, food or
clothes,—and conversing with her in secret,—is considered an adulterous
act of the second degree.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आक्षारितः आशङ्क्यमानदोषः । संव्यवहारार्थम् अपि न संभाषेत ॥ ८.३५३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

354	A man formerly accused of (such) offences, who secretly converses with another man's wife, shall pay the first (or lowest) amercement.
</details>
