+++
title = "357 उपचारक्रिया केलिः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Offering help, flirting, touching of ornaments and clothes, sitting on the same bed,—all this has been declared to be ‘adultery.’—(357)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

या न केनचित् संबन्धेन संबन्धिनी तस्या वस्त्रमाल्यादिदानेन **उपकार**करणम् । तथा भोजनपानादिना । **केलिः** परिहासो वक्रभणितादिना । **स्पर्शो भूषणवाससाम्**[^१९७] । **भूषणं** हारकटकादि तदङ्गलग्नम्, तदीयम् एतद् वेति ज्ञात्वा विनाप्रयोजनेनान्यगृहीतम् अपि स्पृश्यते । एकस्यां खट्वायाम् असंसक्ताङ्गयोर् अपि सहासनम् । सर्वम् एतत् तुल्यदण्डम् ॥ ८.३५७ ॥


[^१९७]:
     M G omit: yā na kenacit . . . sparśo bhūṣaṇavāsasām
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*offering of help*,’— in the shape of clothes, garlands, or
articles of food and drink and other things,—to a lady who is not
related to one in any way.

‘*Flirting*’—joking in ambiguous words, etc.

‘*Ornaments*,’— the necklace, the bracelet and so forth, either when all
this is actually on her body, or even when held by others, if he touches
them, without reason, simply because they belong to that particular
lady.

‘*Sitting on the same bed*,’—oven without actually touching. All this
makes him liable to the same punishment.—(357)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 381), which explains
‘*upakārakriyā*’ as ‘behaving agreeably,’—and ‘*keli*’ as ‘flirtation.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.357-358)**

*Nārada* (12.65-66).—‘If one touches a woman where she should not be
touched, or allows himself to be similarly touched,—all such acts, done
with mutual consent are declared to be Adultery. Bestowing attentions on
a woman, sporting with her, touching her ornaments or clothes, sitting
with her on the same bed,—all such acts are declared to be adulterous.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 175).—‘Catching hold of each other’s hair is
Adultery.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.6-8).—‘Winking at a woman, smiling at her, sending
go-betweens to her, touching her ornaments or clothes,—is called
Adultery of the first degree. Sending perfumes, garlands, fruits, wine,
food or clothes, and conversing with her in secret, are regarded to be
adulterous acts of the second degree. Sitting on the same bed, dallying,
kissing or embracing each other,—is defined as Adultery of the highest
degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.254).—‘Touching of the cloth-knot, the cover over her
breast, or of her thighs or hair, conversing with her at improper times
and places, and sitting with her on the same bed—(all this is
Adultery).’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 855).—(Reproduces Manu CCCLVII.)

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 380).—‘Sending such presents as perfumes and
garlands, incense, ornaments and clothes, and tempting her with foods
and drinks,—all this they regard as Adultery of the middle degree.
Sitting close to each other on the same couch or seat, and catching hold
of each other’s hair,—this should be regarded as Adultery of the worst
degree.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 382).—‘Whatever acts a man does with
the intention of having intercourse with a woman, all such are declared
to he reprehensible, as being conducive to the fulfilment of illicit
love. If a man sends presents to the woman, or meets her at unreasonable
hours and improper places, or touches her neck or hair or clothes, ears,
nose, hands or other parts of the body,—if he sits with her and dines
with her on the same seat,—all this has been declared by the sages to be
Adultery. All such acts as sending presents of perfumes, garlands and
clothes, and sending letters to her, should be regarded as indicative of
Adultery.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**भूषणवाससाम्** उपदेशात् स्त्रीगतानां पुरुषगतानां च स्पर्शनाद् उभयापराधः । यच् चान्यत् स्निग्धदृष्टिनिपातनाङ्गविकारादि तद् अपि संग्रहणम् एव विज्ञेयम् ॥ ८.३५६ ॥

_इदं चान्यत् ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

357	Offering presents (to a woman), romping (with her), touching her ornaments and dress, sitting with her on a bed, all (these acts) are considered adulterous acts (samgrahana).
</details>
