+++
title = "359 अब्राह्मणः सङ्ग्रहणे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In a case of adultery, a non-Brāhmaṇa deserves the penalty ending in death; as the wives of all the four castes are always the most deserving of protection.—(359)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं संग्रहस्वरूपम् । दण्ड इदानीम् अत्रोच्यते । **अब्राह्मणः** क्षत्रियादिः[^२०९] **संग्रहणे** कृते **चतुर्णाम् अपि वर्णानां** हीनोत्तमजातिभेदम् अनपेक्ष्य **प्राणान्तं** प्राणत्याजने मारणे पर्यवसितं **दण्डम् अर्हति** । 


[^२०९]:
     M G: kṣatriyādi-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">कथं</u> पुनर् ब्राह्मण्याम् शूद्रायां च संगृहीतस्य समो दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;">अत्र</u> हेतुस्वरूपम् अर्थम् आह- **दारा रक्ष्यतमाः सदा** । सर्वस्य कस्यचिद् राज्ञा दारा धनशरीरेभ्यो ऽतिशयेन रक्ष्याः । तुल्ये हि सङ्करे शूद्रस्यापि कुलनाशः । एतद् उक्तं भवति । वाचनिको ऽयम् अर्थो ऽत्र हेतुर् वक्तव्यः, उक्तो[^२१०] ऽसौ ।


[^२१०]:
     M G: ko

- अत्र पूर्वे व्याचख्युः । न सर्वस्मिन् संग्रहणे प्रागुक्तदण्डो ऽयम् । किं तर्हि, मुख्ये स्पर्शविसेषे जन्यप्रीतिविशेषात्मके गमने । कथं हि तीर्थादिष्व् अभिवदनं[^२११] गमनं च समदण्डाव् उपपद्येयाताम्[^२१२] । तस्माद् अब्राह्मणः शूद्रो द्विजातिमगने प्राणच्छेदार्हो[^२१३] नान्यः । न हि विषमसमीकरणं न्याय्यम् । अतश् च[^२१४] प्रागुक्तेषु संग्रहणेष्व् अनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षया दण्डः कल्प्यः । यत्रैवं निश्चितं गमनार्थ एवायम् उपकारक्रियादिरूपक्रमस्[^२१५] तत्र मुख्यदण्ड एव युक्तः । न ह्य् अत्र वैषम्यम् अस्ति । दृष्टं चैतद् उभयत्रापीति[^२१६] । 


[^२१६]:
     M G DK (1: 1857): caitad apy ahatvāpīti


[^२१५]:
     M G: upakāraḥ kriyā-


[^२१४]:
     M G: ataḥ sva-


[^२१३]:
     M G: śūdro 'dhijātimagane brāhmaṇe chedārho


[^२१२]:
     M G: samadaṇḍāt tūpapadyeyātām


[^२११]:
     M G: api vadanaṃ; 

- तथेदम् उक्तम् "यद्य् अत्रायं दण्डो मुख्ये संग्रहणे किं करिष्यति" इति । 

- नैवान्यन् मुख्यसंग्रहणम् अस्ति । न ह्य् अस्य लौकिकः पदार्थो ऽवधृतो येन परदारोपकारादौ[^२१७] प्रयुक्त इत्येवम् अस्यैव । यं च भवन्[^२१८] मुख्यं संग्रहणं मन्यते तत्र महान् दण्डः । 


[^२१८]:
     M G: asyaivāyaṃ cābhavan


[^२१७]:
     M G: paraś ca dasyvanukārādau; DK: parasya dāropakārādau

- प्रतिषिद्धं परस्त्रीगमनं शास्त्रपर्यनुयोज्यम्[^२१९] इति चेत्, 


[^२१९]:
     J: śāstraṃ parya-

- उपकारादाव् अपि प्रतिषेधं विद्धि[^२२०] । 


[^२२०]:
     M G: pratiṣedhavat

- प्रतिषेधवद् धि प्रायश्चित्तम् अपि तुल्यं प्रसक्तम्[^२२१] इति चेत्, 


[^२२१]:
     M G DK: tulyaprasaktam

- का नामेयम् अनिष्टापत्तिः । किं तु प्रसज्येत यदा संग्रहणशब्देन तद् उच्येत[^२२२] । सिक्ते हि रेतसि गमनाद्यभिधानम्[^२२३] । यत्र यादृशो दण्डस् तत्र तत्समानं दुःखं प्राप्तम् । अतो ऽस्मिन् विपर्यये रेतःसेकनिमित्तं प्रायश्चित्तं[^२२४] तच्छब्देनाभिधानात् उपकारादौ[^२२५] कल्प्यम् । यदि च संलापादौ स्वल्पो दण्डः स्यात् तदा प्रवर्तेरन् । ततश् च परस्त्रीसंलापादिभूतेनान्येनाभिभवता[^२२६] व्यादीपितमन्मथा स्मरशराकृष्यमाणाः शरीरनिरपेक्षा राजनिग्रहं न गणेयेयुः । आद्यायाम् एव तु प्रवृत्तौ[^२२७] गृह्यमाणेष्व् अप्रबन्धवृत्तौ रागे शक्यं निराकरणम् । तस्मात् परस्त्रीम् उपजापताम् एव महादण्डो युक्तः । 


[^२२७]:
     M G: rājyāpohyānām eva tu nivṛttau


[^२२६]:
     M G: tatparastrīsaṃlāpādibhūtenānyenābhivasatā; DK: parastrīsaṃlāpādibhiḥ


[^२२५]:
     M G: upakārādibhir ādau


[^२२४]:
     M G DK omit: prāyaścittaṃ


[^२२३]:
     M G: gandhenādyabhidhānaṃ; DK: tacchedenābhidhānaṃ


[^२२२]:
     M G: ucyate

इह त्व् **अन्त**ग्रहणाद् आदिभूतेनान्येन दण्डेन भवितव्यम् । न ह्य् असत्यवादवन्तो भवन्ति । प्राणो ऽन्तो यस्य **प्राणान्तस्** तावत् पातयितव्यो यावत् प्राणेषु पतति । तेन सर्वस्वग्रहणाङ्गछेदाद्य्[^२२८] अप्य् उक्तं भवति । एकैकस्य च दण्डत्वम् अन्यत्र ज्ञातं न[^२२९] समुदाये दण्ड्यते इति बहुदण्डेष्व् आम्नातेषु स महान् यो द्विजातिस्त्रीसंग्रहणे[^२३०] ऽब्राह्मणस्य । अतो[^२३१] युक्तैव कल्पना, न[^२३२] सर्वत्र । तत्र कुलस्त्रीभिर् अनिच्छन्तीभिर् भतृमतीभिः[^२३३] संगृह्यमाणस्य प्राणापहरणं हीनजातीयाभिर् अपि[^२३४] ॥ ८.३५९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The nature of ‘adultery’ has been defined. Penalties for it are now laid
down.

‘*A non-Brāhamaṇa*’—the *Kṣatriya* and other castes.

‘*In cases of adultery*’—when adultery has been committed. ‘*Of* *all
four castes*’—irrespectively of the high or low caste of the woman
concerned.

‘*Penalty of death*’—the punishment consisting in striking till death is
brought about.

“How is it that the same penalty applies to the case of adultery with a
*Brāhmaṇa* as well as a *Śūdra* woman?”

The text adds the next sentence by way of answer to this question—‘*For
the wives of all castes are the most deserving of protection*.’
Whosoever’s wife she may be, she needs to be guarded much more carefully
than one’s body and property. Since the ‘admixture of castes’ is the
same in both cases, the family of the *Śūdra* is ruined by it, just as
much as that of the Brāhmaṇa.

What is meant by the question is this—“what is found here is a mere
assertion; some reason for this should be explained; now what is this
reason?”

In answer to this the ancients have offered the following
explanation:—The penalty here prescribed is not meant to apply to all
forms of ‘adultery,’ but only to that which consists in the chief form
of it, consisting in the actual intercourse, which consists in obtaining
a sensual pleasure by a particular form of contact. How could the same
penalty be inflicted in the case of actual sexual intercourse, as also
in that ‘conversing at a watering-place’ and such places (which also has
been declared to be a form of ‘adultery’)? Hence the conclusion is that
the death-penalty is to be inflicted only in the case of a
‘*non-Brāhmaṇa*’—*i.e*., a *Śūdra*—committing adultery with a woman of
the twice-born castes,—and not in the case of any other person. For it
cannot be right to make equal things that are *not* equal. Hence in the
case of the forms of ‘adultery’ described above, the exact penalty has
to be determined by the circumstances attending each individual case.
For instance, if in a certain case it be found for certain that the
‘offering of help’ and other approaches were made solely with a view to
actual sexual intercourse, the right penalty would be the extreme one of
death; as the case would not stand upon a different footing; as in both
cases the real motive is found to be the same.

It has teen asked—“if the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in the
ordinary forms of ‘adultery,’ what would it be in the case of real
‘adultery’?”

But ‘real adultery’ is not something different. The denotation of the
term is not to be fixed by ordinary parlance; hence it cannot be right
to argue that the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in a case where
there is an act which your august self is pleased to call ‘real
adultery.’

“Adultery with women has been forbidden; hence the question as to how
the same punishment is to be meted out in all cases of it should he
addressed to the scriptures.”

But there is similar prohibition regarding the ‘offering of help’ and
such other acts also.

“Well, in that case, it would follow that in all cases the same
expiatory rite would have to be performed.”

Why should this be regarded as an undesirable contingency? The
contingency would certainly arise if the act concerned were spoken of as
‘adultery.’ Though in reality the term is applied only to a case where
there has been emission of semen, yet punishments are meant to be
deterrent, by reason of their causing pain; hence in the case of such
acts as the ‘offering of help’ and the rest, penalty equal to that in
the case of actual intercourse has to be inflicted, on the ground that
if such acts as ‘conversation’ and the rest were associated with small
punishments, then men would he tempted to repeat them; and by frequent
conversations with women, their passion would become whetted; so that
falling a prey to the arrows of Cupid, they would not mind the small
punishments inflicted by the king, and would commit the act even at the
risk of their lives. On the other hand, if at the very first approach,
the man is met by a severely deterrent punishment, the little acts would
not be repeated, and the real act might he averted.

It is for this reason that it has been considered right to inflict a
severe punishment upon those who may just begin to make approaches to
the wives of other men.

So far as the present verse is concerned, we find the term ‘*prāṇānta*,’
‘*ending* in death,’—which shows that the *beginning* of the penalty
would be something else; for unless a thing has a *beginning*, it can
have no *end*. The term ‘*ending in death*’ means *that of which death
is the end*; *i.e*., the punishment should go on being inflicted until
death comes about. Thus it is that all such punishments as ‘confiscation
of property,’ ‘cutting off of limbs’ and so forth become included.

Each of these has been found in other cases to constitute a ‘punishment’
by itself. So that, when a number of punishments have been prescribed,
since all these cannot be inflicted for any single crime, the right
conclusion is that in the case of a non-Brāhmaṇa committing adultery
with a twice-born woman, the highest of those punishments shall be
inflicted, and the man shall be put to death. But even in the case of
women of lower castes, the death-penalty shall be inflicted in the case
of the man committing adultery with an unwilling family-woman whose
husband is alive.—(359)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Abrāhmaṇaḥ*’—‘*Kṣatriya* and the rest’ (misbehaving with a woman of
the higher caste) (Medhātithi and Nandana);—‘Śūdra misbehaving with a
Brāhmaṇa woman’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 388), which says that this
refers to the ‘non-Brāhmaṇa’ misbehaving with a woman of a superior
caste;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 115);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
174) as laying down the penalty for one of the lower caste. misbehaving
with a woman of the higher caste.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.4.1-2).—‘Anybody but a Brāhmaṇa shall suffer corporal
punishment for Adultery;—the wives of men of all castes must be guarded
more carefully than wealth.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26.20).—‘If a man has actually committed adultery, his
organ shall be cut off together with the testicles.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.10-12).—‘If a man violates an unwilling woman, the King
shall confiscate his entire property, have his penis and scrotum cut off
and have him paraded on an ass. When a man enjoys a woman by fraud, bis
punishment shall be confiscation of his entire wealth; and afterwards he
shall be branded with the mark of the female organ and banished from the
town. The highest fine shall be inflicted for connexion with a woman of
equal caste; half that for connexion with a woman of a lower caste; and
a man who has connexion with a woman of a higher caste shall be put to
death.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 389).—‘When a man has completed his
intercourse with the woman, by force, the penalty of death shall be
inflicted.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 392).—‘If a man has intercourse with a
woman who comes to him of her own accord, the punishment shall be half
of that in the case of the woman being unwilling.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 172).—‘A man shall never take liberties with an
unwilling woman; if he has illicit intercourse with a willing woman, he
shall be fined 50 Paṇas, and the woman, half of that.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

संयतया अनिच्छन्त्या ब्राह्मण्या सह संग्रहणे **अब्राह्मणः** शूद्रः **प्राणान्तं दण्डम् अर्हति** । क्षत्रियवैश्याभ्यां तु वर्णवत् तदूना दण्डपरिकल्पना । एवं क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः ब्राह्मणीसंग्रहणे ऽनयाइवापेक्षया दण्डः कल्पयितव्यः, वैश्यस्य च क्षत्रियया । इच्छन्तीषु च ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियावैश्यासु असंयतासु च पूर्ववद् दण्डः कल्पनीयः । संभाषणप्रतिषेधप्रतिप्रसवार्थ्[अम् इदम् उच्यते], किंचिद् विशेषेण ॥ ८.३५८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

359	A man who is not a Brahmana ought to suffer death for adultery (samgrahana); for the wives of all the four castes even must always be carefully guarded.
</details>
