+++
title = "364 यो ऽकामाम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man of equal status violates an unwilling maiden, he deserves immediate death; but if he violates a willing one, he shall not suffer death.—(364)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पासङ्गिकम् इदम् । **तुल्यः** समानजातीयः । सो ऽनिच्छन्तीं कुमारीं **दूषयेत्** कौमार्याद् अपच्यावयेत् स्त्रीपुरुषसंभोगेन, **सद्यस्** तस्मिन्न् एवाहन्य् अविलंबं हन्तव्यः । **सकामाया** दूषणं नास्ति, कुतो वधप्राप्तिः[^२५१] । यच् चात्र भविष्यति तद् वक्ष्यामः । यद्य् अपि तुल्यवध इत्य् एवात्र श्रुतं[^२५२] वधे[^२५३] ऽपि जात्यपेक्षायाम् अवश्यंभाविन्यां प्रत्यासत्त्या संबाध्यते ॥ ८.३६४ ॥


[^२५३]:
     J: vadho


[^२५२]:
     M G: ity avadheḥ śrutaṃ; J: tylya ity vātra śrutaṃ


[^२५१]:
     J: dūṣaṇe nāsti vadhaprāptiḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is stated here is only by the way.

‘*Of equal status*’—belonging to the same caste as the girl.

If he ‘*violates an unwilling maiden*’—*i.e*., deprives her of her
virginity, through sexual intercourse,—he should be killed on the same
day, without delay.

In the case of the willing maiden, there is no real ‘violating’; how
could there be any possibility of death being inflicted? We shall
explain later on what should be done in such a case.

Though in the present text only the man ‘of equal caste’ has been
mentioned, yet from considerations of the castes of the parties
concerned, death also would be inflicted in certain cases.—(364)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 401), which explains
‘*akāmām*’ as ‘unwilling,’—and ‘*tulyaḥ*’ as a ‘man belonging to a caste
intercourse with which is lawful.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 858), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Akāmām*,’ ‘unwilling’—‘*konyām*,’ ‘unmarried girl who retains
her virginity’—if one violates,—he, whether he be of the same caste as
the maiden, or of a different caste, deserves death, *if he is not a
Brāhmaṇa*; if he is a Brāhmaṇa, some other penalty has to be imposed
upon him.—If however the maiden is willing and is violated by a man who
is her ‘equal’—belongs to the same caste as herself—then the penalty
shall be, not death, but the ‘highest amercement.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288) to the effect that even in the case
of a maiden of the same caste, if one has intercourse with her, when she
is not willing, the penalty is *death*; but *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that this
refers to non-Brāhmaṇas,—and that the ‘death, *vadha*’ means the
*cutting off of the male organ* and so forth;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 157a).

It is quoted in Parāśaramādhava (Vyavahāra, p. 321);—and. in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 175), which explains the meaning to be that ‘if a
man despoils a virgin of the same caste without her consent, he deserves
*vadha*, not if he does it with her consent.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.287-218).—‘A man who carries away a decorated maiden,
of the same caste as himself, shall pay the highest amercement; but the
lowest amercement, if she is not decorated; if she belongs to a higher
caste, corporal punishment shall be inflicted. If the man has earned
away a maiden of a caste lower than himself, there is no offence, if she
has gone with her consent; otherwise, the fine inflicted shall be of the
lowest degree. If the maiden has been defiled, the hands of the man
shall he cut off; and he shall he killed if the maiden is of a higher
caste.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 859).—‘If the man has intercourse with an
unwilling maiden, he shall have two of his fingers cut off, and he shall
also pay a fine. If the maiden is of a higher caste, he shall he killed.
If the maiden belongs to the same caste and has been willing, he shall
pay the nuptial fee and also give her ornaments and a double dowry, and
then accept her as wife.’

*Nārada* (12.71-72).—‘When a man has connection with a maiden against
her will, he shall have two fingers cut off. If the maiden belongs to
the highest caste, death and the confiscation of his entire property
shall he his punishment. When, however, he has connection with a willing
maiden, it is no offence; hut he shall bestow ornaments on her, honour
her with other presents and then lawfully espouse her.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.10).—‘The King shall confiscate the entire property of
one who violates an unwilling woman; and having his penis and scrotum
cut off, shall cause him to he paraded on an ass.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26-21).—‘If one has intercourse with a maiden, his
porperty shall he confiscated and he shall be banished.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 401).—‘One who violates an unwilling
maiden, shall he immediately killed; if he defiles her with her consent,
he shall he fined the first amercement.’

*Ārthaśāstra* (p. 172).—‘If one violates a maiden of the same caste as
himself, before puberty, his hands shall be cut off, or he shall be
fined four hundred; if she has attained puberty, his middle and index
fingers shall be cut off, or a fine of 200 shall be imposed, and he
shall pay damages to her father.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 173).—‘If one outrages a girl after marriage, he
should pay a fine of 54 Paṇas; he shall also make good the nuptial fee
paid by her husband and also the expenses of her marriage.’

Do. (p. 172).—‘One may make love to a maiden who has had seven monthly
courses, who has not met her husband after her betrothal; nor shall he
pay any damages to the father. If three years have elapsed since her
puberty there is no offence in a man of the same caste having
intercourse with her after three years; even one of inferior caste
incurs no offence, if the girl is not decorated; he would be a thief if
he took with the girl the ornaments given her by her father.’

Do. (p. 174).—‘If a girl is willingly deflowered by another girl of the
same caste, she should pay a fine of 12 Paṇas, and the woman who has
outraged her, double of that. If a man deflowers a girl without her
consent, he shall be fined a hundred and shall also pay the nuptial fee.
If she has deflowered herself, she should he made the King’s slave. If
one forcibly takes away a maiden, he should he fined 200; if she is
adorned with golden ornaments, then the highest amercement.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

364	He who violates an unwilling maiden shall instantly suffer corporal punishment; but a man who enjoys a willing maiden shall not suffer corporal punishment, if (his caste be) the same (as hers).
</details>
