+++
title = "373 संवत्सराभिशस्तस्य दुष्टस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the convicted man is accused again within a year, he shall be punished with a double fine. the same also in the case of intercourse with a ‘vrātyā’ or a ‘chāṇḍālī.’—(373)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभिशस्तस्** तत्पापकारीत्य् अभिशब्दितः । यो यस्यां स्त्रियां संगृहीतः सो **ऽभिशस्तो** दण्डितः । स चेत् संवत्सरं प्रतिपाल्य,[^२६७] अतीते **संवत्सरे** पुनस् तस्याम् एव संगृह्यते तदा तस्यैकं वारम् अभिशस्तस्य **संवत्सरे** गते पुनर् दुष्टस्य द्विगुणो दण्डः ।


[^२६७]:
     M G: saṃvatsaraḥ pratipālyaḥ

**संवत्सराभिशस्तस्येति** समासपाठे कथंचिद् योजना ।   

**व्रात्यया सह संवासे** तावद् एव । किं यावद् एव पुनर् दुष्टस्य । नेति ब्रूमः । तत्राप्य् उत्तमाधममध्यमानाम् अनेकविधो दण्डः । तत्र को ऽसाव् इह । द्विगुण इति न ज्ञायते । किं तर्हि, **चाण्डाल्या संवासे** यावद् एव **तावद् एव** **व्रात्ययेति**, "सहस्रं त्व् अन्त्यजस्तेयम्" (म्ध् ८.३८५) इति । व्रातः पूगः संघः, तेन चरन्ती[^२६८] पुंश्चलीति कथंचिद् यः कर्तव्यः[^२६९] । अथ वा[^२७०] व्रातम् अर्हति व्रात्येत्य् अस्तु, यकारो दण्डादिः[^२७१] (पाण् ५.१.६६) । का च व्रातम्[^२७२] अर्हति । यानेकपुरुषोपभोग्या पुंश्चली सा हि पुरुषव्रातम् अर्हति । अथ वानेकपुरुषस्वामिका ग्रामस्य[^२७३] दास्यश् च व्रात्याः । ये तूद्वाहहीनां व्रात्यां[^२७४] मन्यन्ते, तेषां मते न मुख्यः शब्दार्थः । अयं हि व्रात्यशब्दः स्मृतिकारैः सावित्रीपतितेषु प्रयुक्तः । न च स्त्रीणां तत्संभवः । अथ स्त्रीणां विवाहस्य तदापत्तिवचनाद् उपनयनम्, तद्धीनपुरुषवद् व्रात्या, गौणस् तर्हि न मुख्यः । यदि नामोपनयनशब्दो ऽनुपनयने विवाहे प्रयुक्तस् तथाप्य् उपनयनहीनो व्रात्य इत्य् उक्ते न विवाहहीन इति प्रतीयते । तथासिंहो ऽयं देश इत्य् उक्ते न सिंहशब्दस्य माणवके प्रयुक्तस्यापि देशस्यामाणवकत्वं प्रतीयते । अस्ति तत्र मुख्य इहासंभव इति चेत्, नासंभवमात्रनिबन्धना गौणी प्रतीतिः । किं तर्हि, संबन्धम् अपरम् उपेक्ष्य । भवेद् उपनयनशब्दो विवाहे गौणः । व्रात्यशब्दस् तु गौण इति को हेतुः । गौणत्वे ऽपि विवाहाभावनिबन्धन इति दुरुपपदम्[^२७५] । व्रात्यजापि — काकाज् जातः काकः श्येनाज् जातः श्येन इति — व्रात्येति शङ्क्यते । बहुसंबन्धप्रत्यासत्त्या[^२७६] हि तत्र रूपातिदेशप्रतिपत्तिः । व्रात्यभार्या तु सत्य् अपि संबन्धे न व्रात्यशब्देन शक्याभिधातुम् । सो ऽयम् इत्य् अभिसंबन्धे हि "पुंयोगाद् आख्यायाम्" (पाण् ४.१.४८) इति तथा भवितव्यम् । तावतश् चायं भेदविवक्षायां तद्धितेनेति । तस्माद् यदि गौणो व्रात्यशब्दो गृहीतव्यस् तज्जाता प्रत्येया[^२७७] । अथ शब्दार्थे व्रातम् अर्हतीति । विवाहभ्रष्टा तु न मुख्या न गौणीति । न च विवाहकालः स्त्रीणां नियतो यत् कालाद् भ्रष्टा व्रात्याः स्युः । यद् अपि प्राग् ऋतोर् विवाह्याः तद् अपि स्वयंवरस्य ऋतुमत्या विना तत् परेणाभ्यनुज्ञात एव कामम् आ मरण्ं तिष्ठेद्[^२७८] गृहे कन्या[^२७९] ॥ ८.३७३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Convicted*’—charged of the crime; when a man has committed adultery
with a woman and has been punished, he is said to be ‘*convicted*.’

If such a man, within a year, commits adultery with the same woman, then
the man being thus convicted and accused again, the fine shall be
double.

Another reading is ‘*saṃvatsarābhiśastasya*’ in the compounded form. In
this case also the passage may be construed somehow.

‘“*The same also in the case of intercourse with a* “*vrātyā*,”’—that
is, when accused again.

Such cannot be the meaning of the verse, we say. In the case of the
intercourse in question, there are hound to be various grades of
punishment, in the shape of the ‘lowest,’ the ‘middle’ and the ‘highest’
amercement. So that it is not clear the ‘double’ of which one is meant.

What therefore is meant by ‘the same’ is that the line in the case of
intercourse with the ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be ‘the same’ as that in that of
the ‘*caṇḍālī*’; and for the latter case, the tine of ‘one thousand’ has
been prescribed under 385, below.

‘*Vrātyā*.’—‘*Vrāta*’ means *host, crowd*; so that the ‘*vrātyā*’ would
be *one who has intercourse with a large number of men*; the term being
explained etymologically as ‘*vrātena charati*’; or it may be explained
as ‘*vrātam arhati*,’ the *ya* in the middle coming in in accordance
with Pāṇini, 5.1.66. Who would be the woman that would be ‘*vrātyā*’ in
this latter sense? The unchaste woman who has intercourse with several
men; for it is only she that can be said to be *fit for a host*,’
(‘*vrātam arhati*’).

Or, the term ‘*vrātyā*’ may stand for the village slave-girl, who has
several masters.

Some people explain ‘*vrātyā*’ as meaning *unmarried*.

But according to this view the term would not be held to be used in its
primary sense. For the writers on *Smṛti* have used the term in the
sense of ‘those who have fallen off from the Sāvitrī’; and this cannot
he applicable to women.

“But for the woman marriage has been declared to be the substitute for
*upanayana* (initiation into Sāvitrī). So that she who has not been
married, would be a ‘*vrātyā*.’”

But in that case the term would be used in the figurative, not the
primary, sense. Even though the term ‘*upanayana*’ has been used in the
sense of *marriage*, which is *not-upanayana*, yet when it is declared
that ‘the man who is devoid of the *upanayana* is called a *vrātya*,’ it
is never understood to mean that the man *devoid of marriage* is meant.
Just as when it is said that ‘this place is without a lion,’ it is never
understood to mean that ‘the place is without the boy,’—eveu though the
term ‘lion’ may have been figuratively used for the ‘boy.’

“In the latter case there is possibility of the primary moaning of the
term ‘lion’ being applicable, but in the case in question, there is no
such for the term ‘*upanayana*.’”

Figurative use does not depend entirely upon the impossibility of the
primary meaning; it stands in need of other attendant circumstances
also.

Then again, there is no doubt that the term ‘upana yana’ in the sense of
*marriage* can be only figurative; but what reason can there be for
regarding the term ‘*vrātyā*’ also (in the present text) as figurative?
Even though it be figurative, it will he difficult to explain this as
being based upon the fact of there being no marriage.

Further, it may be supposed that the woman born of a *vrātya*,’ is also
a *vrātyā* on the analogy of the bird born of a *crow* being a *crow*,
and that born of the *kite* being a kite. And the term ‘*vrātyā*’ would
he applicable to the child by its relationship to the ‘*vrātyā*’ (the
nominal affix denoting this relationship).

“But the wife of the *vrātya* man cannot be called a ‘*vrātyā*,’ even
though she bear a *relationship* to him.”

But in the case cited the difficulty would be due to the case coming
under Pāṇini’s Sūtra 4.1.18 (by which the feminine form would be
‘*vrātyī*’). The case of ‘the child born of the Vrātyā woman’ however
does not come under this *Sūtra*.

Thus then, if the term ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be taken in a figurative sense,
it is to be understood to stand for ‘the woman born of a *vrātyā*
woman.’ If on the other hand, the term is used in its primary sense,
then it must mean ‘*she who is fit for a vrāta* or crowd,’—The
‘*unmarried woman*’ on the other hand does not come in either as the
primary or the figurative meaning. Further, there is no time fixed for
the marriage of women, by transgressing which they would become *vrātyā*
(in the sense in which the man transgressing the time-limit for
*Upanayana* becomes known as *vrātya*). As for the rule that girls
should be married *before puberty*,—its transgression also is permitted
by the sanctioning of the custom of ‘*Svayaṃvara*,’ ‘self-choice,’ which
can be done only when a woman is of a sufficiently advanced age, and
hence has attained puberty. And further, if no girl were to be married
after puberty, several girls would have to remain in their father’s
house till death.—(373).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vrātyā*’—‘(*a*) A public woman, or (*b*) a woman who belongs, as
slave, to several men, or (*c*) ‘unmarried’ (the last being rejected)
(Medhātithi who is misrepresented by Buhler);—‘the wife of a person,
who, though of a twice-born caste, has not had his sacraments’
(Govindarāja 'and Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 394), which adds the
following explanatory notes:—If a man is found to persist in the
intercourse for one year, after having been convicted of it,—he should
suffer double the penalty prescribed for the first offence of its kind;
and the penalty should be enhanced in proportion to the period of
duration of the connection. ‘*Vrātyā*’ is the woman fallen from virtue,
who has abandoned all meritorious acts; but Halāyudha explains
‘*vrātyā*’ as a maiden that has passed her marriageable age.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.66).—‘On having intercourse with a *Cāṇḍāla*
woman, a man of the three higher castes shall he branded with the sign
of a headless body and banished; but the Śūdra shall be only branded. A
*Cāṇḍāla* approaching an *Ārya* woman shall be put to death.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यो यस्याम् अभिगृहीतः स चेत् संवत्सरे ऽतीते पुनस् तस्याम् एवाभिगृह्येत् तस्य यथोपदेशाद् द्विगुणो दण्डः कर्तव्यः । यस् तु संवत्सराद् अर्वाक् पुनर् अपि गृह्यते तस्य प्रथममासे द्वादशगुणो दण्डः एवं मासानुमासं भागह्रासेन तावद् दण्डप्रकॢप्तिः । यावत् संवत्सरे ऽतीते द्विगुणो दण्ड इति । एवं संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं भागद्वादशभागह्रासेन मासानुमास एव दण्डः प्रकल्प्यः । यावद् एक एव भागो ऽवशिष्ट इति । एवं प्रत्यागमने यो दण्डः प्रकल्प्यते तस्याप्य् एषैव प्रकॢप्तिर् अनूद्यते । चण्डालीगमने च दण्डं वक्ष्यति "सहस्रं त्व् अन्त्यजस्त्रियम्" इति ॥ ३.३७२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

373	On a man (once) convicted, who is (again) accused within a year, a double fine (must be inflicted); even thus (must the fine be doubled) for (repeated) intercourse with a Vratya and a Kandali.
</details>
