+++
title = "+100"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ अयं ते ' इति द्वादशर्चं सप्तमं सूक्तं भृगुगोत्रस्य नेमस्यार्षम् । 'अयमस्मि जरितः' इति द्वृचेनेन्द्रो नेमसमीपमेत्य स्वकीयं माहात्म्यमवोचत् अतस्तस्य द्वृचस्य स एवर्षिः यस्य वाक्यं स ऋषिः' (अनु. २. ४) इति न्यायात् । षष्ठी जगती । सप्तम्याद्यास्तिस्रोऽनुष्टुभः । शिष्टास्त्रिष्टुभः । इन्द्रो देवता। 'यद्वाग्वदन्ती,  देवीं वाचम्' इत्येते वाग्देवत्ये शिष्टा ऐन्द्र्यः । तथा चानुकान्तम्-- अयं ते द्वादश नेमो भार्गवस्त्रैष्टुभं षष्ठी जगती परास्तिस्रोऽनुष्टुभोऽयमिति द्वृचेनेन्द्र आत्मानमस्तौदुपान्त्ये वाच्यौ ' इति । वाग्देवत्ये पशौ ‘यद्वाग्वदन्ती' इति वपाया अनुवाक्या । सूत्रितं च -- ‘ यद्वाग्वदन्त्यविचेतनानि पतङ्गो वाचं मनसा बिभर्ति ' ( आश्व. श्रौ. ३. ८) इति । पूर्वोक्त एव पशौ देवीं वाचम्' इति हविषो याज्या । सूत्रितं च  -- देवीं वाचमजनयन्त देवा जनीयन्तो न्वग्रव इति तिस्रः' ( आश्व. श्रौ. ३. ८) इति । प्रयाणसमये वयसाममनोज्ञा वाचः श्रुत्वैतां जपेत् । सूत्रितं च -- कनिक्रदज्जनुषं प्रबुवाण इति सूक्ते जपेद्देवीं वाचमजनयन्त देवा इति च (आश्व. गृ. ३. १०. ९) इति ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

100 (709)  
Indra (1–9, 12), Vāc (10–11)  
Nema Bhārgava (1–3, 6–12), Indra (4–5)  
12 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 6, anuṣṭubh 7–9  
A vivid but baffling hymn, consisting in great part of snatches of dialogue or direct  speech that may or may not be connected with each other. Needless to say, it has  been much discussed and disagreed upon, and our own interpretation of it is not  entirely secure.  
The first two verses are a brief dialogue between an unidentified speaker and his  addressee, Indra. The first speaker demands that Indra obtain a portion of the sac rifice for him before he will assist Indra in his deeds (vs. 1). In verse 2 Indra promises  him the soma and proposes an active partnership. The first speaker has been vari ously identified, but we are in agreement with Oldenberg (Noten ad loc.), inter alia,  that it is Vāyu, the god who along with Indra receives the first soma-offering at the  soma sacrifice. (The word ágre “at the beginning” in vs. 2 gives strong support to  this view.)  
Thus we seem to have embarked, in mythical time, on the ritual day of real  time. Such blending of mythical and current ritual time is not uncommon. And,  in our view, what happens next, in the next snatch of dialogue (vss. 3–6), is the  emergence of the real-time ritualist. A singer (who may, or may not, be named  Śarabha [vs. 6]), addresses his colleagues (vs. 3), urging them to praise Indra, even  as he raises doubts about Indra’s existence—doubts that Indra counters directly  (vs. 4) by his epiphany and self-praise. The scene has shifted from the mythical  dialogue between Indra and Vāyu to the ritual dialogue between Indra and the  singer.  
Indra continues to speak in verse 5, though the contents of the speech are  rather unclear. In our view the verse concerns the relationship between Indra and  the Maruts, often called Indra’s “companions” (sákhāyaḥ) as here, and the verse is  here both because of the progress of the ritual day and because of an association  of ideas with verses 1–2. The second or Midday Pressing of the soma sacrifice is  dedicated to Indra and the Maruts, but the Maruts’ share of the pressing was only  established mythically when they reminded Indra of their help to him in the Vr̥tra  battle and demanded from him a share in the soma—a scene effectively dramatized  in the famous hymn I.165. Thus, we have moved from the Morning Pressing with  Indra and Vāyu to the Midday Pressing with Indra and the Maruts, and the covert  thematic connection is that both Vāyu and the Maruts demanded a share of the  sacrifice from Indra. What makes the mental association even more complex is the  fact that in verse 5 Indra remains in dialogue with the singer, while remembering  and recounting to the singer his side of a dialogue with the Maruts. In any case the  singer is now convinced of Indra’s reality and declares that Indra’s deeds are to be  praised.  

The following three verses (7–9) in dimeter meter (as opposed to the trimeter  meter of the rest of the hymn) are in our opinion the contents of the singer’s  praise hymn to Indra, highlighting the Vr̥tra battle (vss. 7 and 9) and the fal con’s theft of soma for Indra (vs. 8). But, not surprisingly, the narration is far  from straightforward. Most strikingly, in verse 7 there is a further layer of ven triloquism: in this verse the singer imitates the speech of yet another speaker, a  witness or participant in the Vr̥tra battle, urging the waters, freed by Indra’s  slaying of Vr̥tra, to flow forth. The speaker whom the singer is quoting might  be Indra, speaking of himself in the 3rd person or perhaps the Maruts. But in  either case we the audience are three levels down: we are listening to the hymn’s  poet (supposedly Nema Bhārgava) imitating an unnamed singer in dialogue  with Indra, and the singer is in turn imitating Indra or some other eyewitness  of the mythical scene. The following verse (8) returns to straight narration, of  the falcon’s flight with the soma. In verse 9 we are back to the Vr̥tra battle, but  notably the description is in the present tense, as if still from the point of view  of an eyewitness, and it depicts a curious, indeed unprecedented episode, Indra’s  mace lying covered with water—a scene that reminds us of the dead Vr̥tra, who  is famously described as lying defeated with the waters streaming over him in  I.32.8, 10.  
As complex and uncertain as our reading of these first nine verses is, the fol lowing two verses (10–11) are considerably more mystifying. It is not that the  language or the content is difficult in itself; the verses concern the goddess Speech  (Vāc) and present the common image of Speech as a milk-cow (vss. 10–11) and  the common theme of the four divisions of speech (vs. 10). The perplexing part is  why Vāc should make her appearance at this point in the hymn. The best answer  to this question was given by Oldenberg well over a century ago (1885): he cited a  story in later Vedic prose (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa IV.1.3) relating a dispute between  Indra and Vāyu after the Vr̥tra battle. Vāyu, as the swiftest god, was sent to make  certain that Vr̥tra was dead, and he was rewarded with the first offering. Indra  wanted a share of it (thus the opposite of the issue in our first two verses) and  promised Vāyu in return that speech would be intelligible. The two gods then  wrangled over their proper shares, and Indra received only a quarter, not the half  he was expecting. Therefore he decreed that only a quarter of speech would be  intelligible. The details of the story match in many ways those in the two verses  in question, and it may well be that with these verses we return to the beginning  of our hymn and the bargaining between Vāyu and Indra, in a sort of thematic  ring composition. However, the Brāhmaṇa story is narratively confused and,  as just noted, assigns the roles of petitioner and share-giver exactly opposite.  It could therefore also be an after-the-fact attempt to rationalize the peculiari ties of this part of the R̥gvedic hymn. We reserve judgment, and also point out  that the cow in association with speech is celebrated at the end of the next hymn  (VIII.101.15–16). And then there is the final verse, addressed to Viṣṇu and echoing the first  two verses verbally:  the initial vocative “comrade” matches Indra’s offer of  comradeship to Vāyu in verse 2c, and the promise “we two will smite Vr̥tra [/the  obstacle]” matches the almost identical phrase in 2d “we two will keep smashing  obstacles.” The close similarity of these verses led Geldner to assume that Viṣṇu is  the speaker in verse 1, not Vāyu. In our opinion this assumption is unnecessary.  We think rather that the final verse is an attempt to identify Viṣṇu with Vāyu,  or to transform the older god Vāyu (who has a good Indo-Iranian pedigree)  into the emergent and increasingly important god Viṣṇu, whose roots are not  so deep.  
Like many late R̥gvedic hymns, the difficulties here lie not in the language  or the imagery, as is the case in earlier hymns. A major question in this hymn  is what ties all the parts together. If we are correct that the first nine verses  mark the progress from the morning to the midday rituals, via the gods (Vāyu,  Maruts) associated with Indra at those occasions and their negotiations with  Indra about their sacrificial share, and if Oldenberg is correct that the verses  concerning Speech (vss. 10–11) conceal the story about the dispute between  Indra and Vāyu after the Vr̥tra slaying, then we confront two different and  superficially contradictory possibilities of hymnic unity. On the one hand, it  may be a ritual unity—the progress of the ritual day—but then the Speech part  awkwardly returns us to the beginning of the day. Or it may be a mythological unity, with the Vr̥tra battle viewed from different angles by different partici pants—but this leaves the ritual real time, with the prominent role of the singer,  out of consideration. It is possible, but extremely speculative, that the final  Viṣṇu verse gives us a way to reconcile these two approaches. As we have noted  frequently elsewhere, the Third Pressing of the soma sacrifice was most likely a  ritual innovation, slowly adopted by various clans at different times through the  R̥gvedic period and after. Viṣṇu’s most famous deed, the most prominent theme  associated with him in the R̥gveda, is the cosmogonic taking of “three strides,”  which define and measure out the three worlds. It is possible that because of his  association of “three,” the introduction of Viṣṇu at the end of this hymn brings  us to the end of the new ritual day, to the Third Pressing, while maintaining the  mythic focus on the Vr̥tra slaying.  
We do not claim to have solved the manifold difficulties of this hymn, but we  hope that readers can still enjoy and respond to the intense directness of the dia logues and the stimulating if destabilizing rapidity of the transitions from one  vignette to another.
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

Indra On the hymn in general see the published introduction, as well as Oldenberg (Noten ad loc. and "Indra, Vāyu, der Vrtrakampf ̥ und die Erschaffung der Sprache” [pp. 54-60 in “Ākhyāna Hymnen im Ṛigveda,” ZDMG 39 (1885): 52-90 = KlSch. 474-512]) and Geldner’s long and rather despairing introduction.
</details>
