+++
title = "04 साङ्ख्ययोगौ पृथग्बालाः"

+++
5.4 Balah, the fools; na panditah, not the learned ones; pravadanti,
speak of; sankhya-yogau, Sankhya \[Sankhya, i.e. monasticism, is that
which is suited for sankhya, Self-iniry.\] (the Path of Knowledge) and
(Karma-)yoga; as prthak, different, having opposite and different
results. The learned ones, the wise, however, admit one, unconflicting
result. How; Any one who samyak, properly; asthitah, resorts to, i.e.
follows; ekam api, even one, between the Path of Knowledge and (Karma-)
yoga; vindate, gets; phalam, the result; ubhayoh, of both. For, the
result of both is that Liberation itself. Therefore there is no conflict
with regard to the result. Objection: After beginning the topic with the
words, 'renunciation' and '(Karma-) yoga', how is it that the Lord
speaks of the identity of the results of the path of Knowledge and
(Karma-) yoga, which is beside the point; Reply: This defect does not
arise. Although the estion was put by Arjuna merely with regard to
renunciation and Karma-yoga, yet the Lord, without actually avoiding
them, and by adding something special which was intended by Him, gave
the answer by expressing them through other words, 'Sankhya' and
'(Karma-) yoga'. Those very 'renunciation and 'Karma-yoga', when they
are (respectively) associated with Knowledge and such of Its means as
eanimity etc., are meant by the words 'Sankhya' and 'yoga'. This is the
Lord's veiw. Therefore there is no discussion out of the context. How
can the result of both be attained by the proper performance of only
one; The answer is:
