+++
title = "13 सर्वकर्माणि मनसा"

+++
5.13 Aste, he continues; sukham, happily; sannyasya, having given up;
sarva-karmani, all actions-nitya, naimittika, kamya and nisiddha
(prohibited actions); \[See note on p. 128.-Tr.\] manasa, mentally,
through discriminating wisdom-i.e. having given up (all actions) by
seeing inaction in action, etc. Freed from the activities of speech,
mind and body, effortles, placid in mind, and devoid of all external
wants which are different from the Self, he continues happily. This is
what has been said. Where and how does the vasi, man of self-control,
i.e. one who has his organs under control, remain; This is being
answered: Nava-dvare pure, in the town with nine gates, of which seven
\[Two ears, two eyes nostrils, and mouth.\] are in the head for one's
own experiences, and two are below for urination and defecation. As
possessed of those gates, it is called the 'town with nine gates'. Being
like a town, the body is called a town with the Self as its only master.
And it is inhabited by the organs, mind, intellect and objects, like
citizens, as it were, which serve its needs and which are productive of
many results and experience. Renouncing all actions, the dehi, embodied
one, resides in that town with nine gates. Objection: What is the need
of this specification; For all embodied beings, be they monks or not,
reside in bodies to be sure! That being so, the specification is
needless. The answer is: The embodied one, however, who is
unenlightened, who perceives merely the aggregate of the body and organs
as the Self, he, in his totality, thinks, 'I am in a house, on the
ground, or on the seat.' For one who experiences the body alone as the
Self, there can certainly be no such conviction as, 'I am in the body,
like one's being in a house.' But, for one who realizes the Self as
distinct from the aggregate of body etc. it becomes reasonable to have
the conviction, 'I am in the bdoy. It is reasonable that as a result of
knowledge in the form of discriminating wisdom, there can be a mental
renunciation of the actions of others, which have been ignorantly
superimposed on the supreme Self. Even in the case of one in whom has
arisen discriminating wisdom and who has renounced all actions, there
can be, like staying in a house, the continuance in the body itself-the
town with nine gates-as a conseence of the persistence of the remnants
of the results of past actions which have started bearing fruit, because
the awareness of being distinct (from the body) arises while one is in
the body itself. Form the point of veiw of the difference between the
convictions of the enlightened and the unenlightened persons, the
alifying words, 'He continues in the body itself', do have a purpose to
serve. Although it has been stated that one continues (in the body) by
relinishing actions of the body and organs ignorantly superimposed on
the Self, still there may be the apprehesion that direct or indirect
agentship inheres in the Self. Anticipating this, the Lord says: na eva
kurvan, without himself doing anything at all; and na karayan, not
causing (others) to do, (not) inducing the body and organs to activity.
Objection: Is it that the direct or indirect agentship of the embodied
one inheres in the Self and ceases to be after renunciation, as the
movement of a traveller ceases with the stoppage of his movement; Or, is
it that they do not exist owing to the very nature of the Self; As to
this, the answer is: The Self by Its nature has neither direct nor
indirect agentship. For it was stated, 'It is said that৷৷.This (Self) is
unchangeable' (2.25). 'O son of Kunti, although existing in the body, It
does not act, nor is It affected' (13.31). And it is also stated in the
Upanisad, 'It seems to meditate, as it were; It seems to move, as it
were' (Br. 4.3.7).
