+++
title = "19 इहैव तैर्जितः"

+++
5.19 Iha eva, here itself, even while they are living; is sargah, rirth;
jitah, conered, overcome; taih, by them, by the learned ones who see
with eanimity; yesam, whose; manah, minds, the internal organs; are
sthitam, established, made steadfast; samye, on sameness, in Brahman
that exists as the same in all beings. It is nirdosam, free from
defects. Because of Its existence in such mean objects as an eater of
dog's meat, etc., though It is supposed by fools to be affected by the
defects of those (objects), still It remains untouched by those
blemishes, hi, because It is free from defects. Nor even is It
differentiated by Its alities, since Consciousness is free from
alifications. And the Lord will speak of desires etc. (cf. 13.6 etc.) as
the attributes of the aggregate of body and organs, and will also say,
'Being without beginning and without alities' (13.31). Nor even are
there the ultimate distinctions which can create differentiation in the
Self, \[According to the Vaisesikas, everything is possessed of not only
alities but also of antya-visesa (ultimate distinction), which is a
category like substance, ality, action, etc. This distinction makes
every entity different from other entities. Thus, individual souls have
their own ultimate distinctions by the very fact that they are
individuals. Vedanta denies such a category. Besides, the Self is one
and omnipresent. Therefore there is nothing else from which It can be
distinguished.-Tr.\] because there is nothing to prove that these
ultimate distinctions exist in every body. Hence, samam brahma, Brahman
is the same and one. Tasmat, therefore; te, they; sthitah, are
established; brahmani, in Brahman Itself. As a result, not even a shade
of defect touches them. For they have no self-identification in the form
of perceiving the aggregate of body etc. as the Self. On the other hand,
that statement (Gau. Sm. 17.20) refers to the man who has
self-identification in the form of perceiving the aggregate of body,
(organs) etc. as the Self, for that statement-'A sacrificer incurs sin
by not adoring eally one who is an eal, and by adoring eally one who is
not eal to himself, pointedly refers to persons who are the objects of
adoration. It is indeed seen that in worship, charity, etc. the
determining factors are the possession of such special alities as being
'a knower of Brahman', 'versed in the six auxiliary branches of Vedic
learning', and 'versed in the four Vedas'. But Brahman is bereft of
association with all alities and defects. This being so, it is logical
that they are established in Brahman. And 'adoring an eal, ৷৷.an uneal,'
etc. has reference to men of action. \[Those engaged in actions with a
sense of agentship, etc.-Tr.\] But this subject under consideration,
beginning from 'The embodied man৷৷.having given up all actions mentally'
(13) to the end of the chapter, is concerning one who has given up all
actions. Since the Self is Brahman which is without blemish and is the
same (in all), therefore-
