+++
title = "22 ये हि"

+++
5.22 Hi, since; bhogah, enjoyments; ye samsparsajah, that result from
contact with objects, that arise from contact between the objects and
the organs; are eva, verily; duhkha-yonayah, sources of sorrow, because
they are creations of ignorance. It is certainly a matter of experience
that physical and other sorrows are created by that itself. By the use
of the word eva (verily), it is understood that, as it happens here in
this world, so does it even in the other world. Realizing that there is
not the least trace of happiness in the world, one should withdraw the
organs from the objects which are comparable to a mirage. Not only are
they sources of sorrow, they also adi-antavantah, have a beginning and
an end. Adi (beginning) of enjoyments consists in the contact between
objects and senses, and their end (anta), indeed, is the loss of that
contact. Hence, they have a beginning and an end, they are impermanent,
being present in the intervening moment. This is the meaning.
(Therefore) O son of Kunti, budhah, the wise one, the discriminating
person who has realized the Reality which is the supreme Goal; na
ramate, does not delight; tesu, in them, in enjoyments. For delight in
objects is seen only in very foolish beings, as for instance in animals
etc. This extremely painful evil, which is opposed to the path of Bliss
and is the source of getting all miseries, is difficult to resist.
Therefore one must make the utmost effort to avoid it. Hence the Lord
says:;
