+++
title = "+008"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘प्र केतुना' इति नवर्चमष्टमं सूक्तं त्रैष्टुभम् । त्वष्टृपुत्रस्त्रिशिरा नामर्षिः । आदितः षडाग्नेय्यस्ततस्तिस्र ऐन्द्र्यः । तथा चानुक्रान्तं- प्र केतुना नव त्रिशिरास्वाष्ट्रस्तृचोऽन्त्य ऐन्द्रः' इति । आदितः षण्णां प्रातरनुवाकाश्विनशस्त्रयोराग्नेयक्रतावुक्तो विनियोगः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

8 (834)  
Agni (1–6), Indra (7–9)  
Triśiras Tvāṣṭra  
9 verses: triṣṭubh  
Although the Anukramaṇī assigns this hymn, along with the following one (X.9  to the Waters), to a different poet from the first seven Agni hymns of the maṇḍala,  which are attributed to Trita Āptya, it is fairly clear that these nine hymns belong  together, on the basis of criteria like shared phraseology, as well as larger structural  considerations. (See Oldenberg 1888: 233–34.) The poet of X.8–9 is given as Triśiras  Tvāṣṭra, a speaking name: “Three-Headed Son of Tvaṣṭar” and a figure who is the  mythological enemy of Trita. Thus, as Oldenberg saw, the two poets to whom this  sequence of nine hymns is ascribed are narratively linked, and both names were  probably assigned as poets to these hymns because of the mythological narrative  sketched in this particular hymn. Trita’s defeat of his three-headed foe, also known as Viśvarūpa (“having all  forms”), is treated in the last three verses of our hymn (7–9). The myth goes back to  Indo-Iranian times in one form or other. In the Younger Avestan Hom Yašt (Yasna  9–11), Zarathushtra asks the Haoma (= Skt. Soma) the names and stories of the  men who first pressed him. In Y 9.7–8 Haoma names a certain Āϑβiia (note the  similarity to, but not identity with, Āpt(i)ya) as the second man to press him, whose  son, Θraētaona, smote a mighty serpent-dragon (Aži Dahāka; cf. the Sanskrit  cognate áhi “serpent” frequently used of Vr̥tra) with three heads (ϑrikamǝrǝδa; cf.  mūrdhán “head” in vss. 3 and 6 of this hymn). Immediately thereafter (Y 9.10–11)  he identifies Θrita (= Skt. Trita) as his third presser, one of whose sons defeats  another formidable dragon (also aži) in a particularly imaginative fashion. The  names Āϑβiia and Θrita, though differently distributed, and the three-headed mon ster speak strongly for the kinship of the two myths, though they are not identical  in all their features.  
What is not clear is why this little mythic vignette has been appended at the end  of this Agni cycle, though we will suggest some reasons at the end of the introduc tion. Here and elsewhere in Vedic the story of Trita Āptya’s slaying of three-headed  Viśvarūpa is associated with Indra (even in this hymn; see vss. 8–9), not Agni, and  it is assimilated in several ways to the better-known Vala myth—generally an Indra  myth. First, Trita Āptya begins his quest in a cave or hole of some sort (vs. 7a), and  the happy result of the defeat of Viśvarūpa is the release of his cows (vss. 8–9)—just  as the cows confined in the Vala cave are released at the end of that myth. Moreover,  the “familial” (vs. 7) or “ancestral” (vs. 8) weapons Trita employs in the fight appear  to be mental and verbal (see especially the “visionary thought” he seeks in 7b and  his “speaking” his weapons in 7d). In the Vala myth Indra and his helpers, the  Aṅgirases, break open the cave with verbal spells, not physical weapons. Since the  corresponding Avestan version does not have these elements, it is likely that these  Vala-like features were grafted onto the inherited myth, whose popularity was per  
haps waning in R̥gvedic times. (It does have a robust revival in Vedic prose.) The first few verses of the hymn for the most part contain standard Agni fare,  though with a cosmic dimension. The fire, conceived of also as a powerful male  animal, reaches through the worlds to heaven itself (vs. 1), just after it is born (vs. 2).  His birth and installation are further treated in verse 3, where the ritual references  probably also have cosmic referents. The hymn begins to take an odd turn in verse  4. In that verse Agni “sets seven steps,” thereby “begetting an alliance (or, the god  Mitra).” The seven-step reference is to the culminating ritual action particularly  of the marriage ceremony, after which the marriage is irrevocable, when the bride  and groom take seven steps together; other alliances can be assimilated to the mar riage alliance by the performance of the seven steps (see Jamison 1996a: 120–23).  These seven steps are always taken beside the ritual fire, and as Proferes (2007) has  discussed at length (on this particular passage, see p. 61), the fire is also a symbol  of the alliances made by social groups. Through those alliances the fire itself is  strengthened and increased, hence the “for the sake of your own body” in this verse.  The reason for this intrusion of the social world at this point in the hymn is unclear,  

since heretofore the focus has been entirely on Agni. In the following verses (5–6)  Agni is identified with, or transformed into, a series of divinities and functional  roles. Perhaps these identifications were suggested by the alliance generated in verse  4, representing the web of associations in which Agni participates.  
The six Agni verses end with Agni setting his head (mūrdhán) in heaven. As  noted above, the hymn in fact contains two occurrences of mūrdhán (vss. 3, 6),  and its Avestan cognate kamǝrǝδan (with pejorative ka-prefix), in the bahuvrīhi  Θri-kamǝrǝδa “having three heads,” qualifies the monster killed by Āϑβiia’s son.  The corresponding form in the Trita myth in this hymn has a different word for  head, -śíras- (acc. sg. m. tri-śīrṣā́ṇam, vs. 8). However, the R̥gveda does contain  an occurrence of tri-mūrdhán—but referring to Agni, in the phrase trimūrdhā́naṃ  
saptáraśmim “having three heads and seven reins” (I.146.1). The three heads are  most likely the three ritual fires, the seven reins possibly the seven priests, but the  important thing is that this same phrase, “having three heads and seven reins,” is  found in our hymn X.8, describing the enemy Viśvarūpa (8c). This, we would submit,  is the initial point of contact between this Agni hymn and the Trita saga appended  to it: the old Indo-Iranian myth used the word *tri-mr̥Hdhan for the three-headed  beast. But the epithet can also be used positively as a descriptor of Agni with his  three representative fires on the ritual ground. The poet is playing with the delicious  positive/negative polarities of the epithet, and signals the connection between the  Agni portion of the hymn and the little Trita myth by using the word originally used  of the monster, mūrdhán, elsewhere in the hymn.  
But there may be another connection. As we noted, Agni undergoes several  transformations in the last verses of his section of the hymn. And it is quite possible  that verse 7 is suggesting yet another transformation, into Trita or “the third (fire),”  being born in the fireplace, seeking poetic vision and ritual release. Agni sometimes  seems to be called Trita (see esp. X.46.3, 6), and the Trita/Viśvarūpa story may be  introduced here via a modulation through Agni identified with Trita.
</details>
