+++
title = "17 यस्य नाहङ्कृतो"

+++
18.13-17 Panca etc. upto na nibadhyate Conclusion : the established end,
because here a decision is arrived at. Basis : the material object
Destiny : the good and bad result \[of actions\] previously accumulated.
These five viz., the basis etc., constitute the entire assembly of
factors and hence they are the causes for each action. But other
\[commentators give an etymology of\] adhisthana 'basis' to mean 'That
by which all actions are governed'; and on that ground they believe that
it denotes that action which exists in the intellect; which comes ot be
due to the Rajas, and is being prone to transform itself into the pentad
of (the mental dispositions viz.) the content, the faith, the happiness,
the desire to know and the aversion to know; which is referable by the
term karma-yoga (that which yokes man into activity); and which is
described at times by the term prayatna 'effort'. Agent : the
ascertainer characterised by the intellect. Instrument : \[the personal
instruments viz.\] the mind, the eye etc., and also the external ones
like sword etc. Activity : the activity of upper life-breath, nether
life-breath etc. The effects of the righteous and unrighteous acts are
indicated by the term Destiny. All the dispositions located in the
intellect are indicated by these two. Still other commentators, however,
take Basis to be the Absolute Lord. Due to his imperfect intellect :
because of his having indecisive knowledge. But he, who performs actions
with the stability due to disappearance of th I-sense (limited) and \[a
stability\] refined by hundreds of reasoning, as detailed earlier - he
does not get the fetter, because he is a man of perfect intellect. This
is what is intended \[in the passage under study\].
