+++
title = "19 ज्ञानङ् कर्म"

+++
18.19 Jnanam etc. In enumerating the Strands : In the consdered
conclusion of the Sankhya where the Strands are decided numerically,
these instruments of knowledge etc., are declared to be of three types.
that you must listen to. This is what is conveyed by the association of
words (or ideas) here. By instrument-of-knowledge (Jnanam) the two-fold
instruments viz. that of knowledge and of activity, are spoken of.
Similarly object (karman) speaks of both the object of knowledge and the
object of activity and agent (kartr) refers to both the knower and the
performer. Now the three verses. Sarvabhutesu etc. (20-22) speak of the
three-foldness of the instrument of knowledge. That is why the
Instrumental Yena is employed. The nature of all the instruments of
knowledge and of action is described by this much of portion. The
three-foldness of object of both the types viz. the object of knowledge
and the object of action is described by the tripple verses Niyatam etc.
(23-25). The three-fold nature of the agent of both the categories viz.
the knower and the doer is briefly explained by the three verses
Muktasangah etc. (26-28). The three types of the intellect is examined
by three verses, Pravrttim etc. (30-32), in order to explain the
different nature of the two-fold instruments (i.e. of knowledge and of
action). By this means the three-fold nature of other instrumetns is
also indicated. The instrument reires technical know-how, and this
technical know-how, of course, consists of the pentad that includes
content and so on. However, because faith \[included in this pentad\]
has already been dealt with (XVII, 2ff.), and because the desire to know
and the aversion to know \[both belonging to the pentad\] are obtained
by inference through the firmness and happiness \[of the pentad\], the
three-fold division of the last two is explained by the verses Dhrtya
yaya etc. (33-35) and Sukham tu idanim etc. (36-39). All this \[the
Lord\] declares \[one by one\] ;-
