+++
title = "40 न तदस्ति"

+++
18.40 Na tad asti etc. In this manner, the agent, the object and the
instrument, the intellect and content, and happiness are classified
under different heads of the Sattva etc. Because they have a mutual
relationship of subordinate-and-principal or of the
oppressed-and-opressor or of the togetherness; becuase they have
modifications occuring either together or in a specific seence; and
because they, on that account, have varieties beyond all counting; they
are capable of bringing forth fruits (results) of umpteen variety. This
(statement) logically demonstrates in detail the uncomprehensibility of
actions (their results) which has been indicated earlier (above IV,
17ff.). All these beings, starting from the gods down to the immovables,
do not transcend the relation with the traid of the Strands. Indeed it
has been said - 'Commencing from Brahma (personal god) down to the
\[insignificant\] worm, no one is really happy; all, without exception,
having desire to live, undertake different acts of agitation (or commit
different frauds to appear to be happy).' Indeed the real happiness is
\[only\] to him whose mind has gone beyond the Strands and not to anyone
else. This is what is intended here. So far, the three-fold nature of
each of the six items and also of the content etc., has been explained.
'Among them, he who is occupied with the group of the Sattva (Strand)
and who has attained the divine wealth is fit for the subject under
study; and you are of that sort' - telling in this manner, Arjuna has
been encouraged. Now the following is declared : If you engage yourself
in the action with this reslove for correct knowledge, then because of
your undertaking of your own righteous action and because of your
sanctity through wisdom, there is no bondage of aciton for you. On the
other hand, if you don't follow this, \[even\] then there must
necessarily be some activity in you; because your birth itself stands to
that effect. Since, being controlled by its own intrinsic nature,
everything, though it may have, for a short while, its nature concealed
due to some fault, regains its own nature that becomes perceivable when
the concealing agent disappears. For example, the nature of the castes
is of this nature. Thus when an effort necessarily takes place, there
would be \[for its agent\] its fruit. This \[the Bhagavat\] says-
