+++
title = "+104"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ योनिः' इति नवर्चम् एकादशं सूक्तं कुस्सस्यार्षं त्रैष्टुभम् ऐन्द्रम् । 'योनिर्नव' इत्यनुक्रान्तम् । सूक्तविनियोगो लैङ्गिकः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

104  
Indra  
Kutsa Āṅgirasa  
9 verses: triṣṭubh  
At nine verses, this final hymn of the Kutsa Indra cycle is longer than its immediate  predecessor by one verse. On this basis Oldenberg identified it as an Anhangslied  (a supplementary hymn appended to the end of a divinity cycle), an opinion sup ported by the fact that, alone of the Kutsa hymns (I.94–98, 100–115), it lacks the  Kutsa refrain always found in the last hemistich of the last verse of each hymn.  (This applies only to trimeter hymns; the gāyatrī hymn I.97, not surprisingly, also  lacks it.) But if “supplementary” suggests something attenuated or in decline, that  suggestion is emphatically false. This hymn is extraordinary complex and challeng ing, especially in its mythological portion (vss. 3–5), and we are far from solving the  many puzzles it presents. It may have been inserted just here in the Saṃhitā because  the mythological portion in part concerns a foe named Kuyava, or the demon “of  bad grain,” that is, bad harvest, mentioned as having been slain by Indra in the last  verse of the preceding hymn (I.103.8ab). There are also several other lexical connec tions between I.103 and this hymn, particularly the two forms of śrád-dhā “trust”  in each hymn, which may have encouraged the insertion, or even the composition,  of this supplementary poem.  
As in many hymns, an invitation to Indra to come to the sacrifice is found in  the first verse. But some of the features of this verse give us a taste of what is to  

come. For example, the apparently straightforward simile in pāda b, rendered here  as “like a steed sounding off,” is actually a triple pun (impossible to convey in  translation): the participle suvānáḥ can belong to three different verbs: “sound,”  “impel,” and “press (of soma).” When Indra takes his seat on the ritual ground, he  is compared to a horse neighing, to a horse that has been driven to the place where  it takes its rest, and finally to soma (which itself is often compared to a horse) being  pressed in its womb. In fact the same phraseology is applied to soma elsewhere (cf.  IX.70.7).  
The second verse introduces the theme that will dominate the mythological por tion, the importance of having Indra and the other gods on our side in the battle  against the traditional, perhaps indigenous, enemies of the Ārya, identified as Dāsa  (vs. 2) and Dasyu (vs. 5). The word “color” in the final pāda of the verse is a fre quent way of referring to a cohort, a unified group of people. Our urgent need for  Indra and his aid returns after the mythological portion, in fact starting with the  second half of verse 5. The poet twice asserts his trust in Indra’s power (6d, 7a); this  may not be a mere repetition but refer rather to the two aspects of Indra’s power,  as described in the first verse of the preceding hymn (I.103.1), partly in heaven and  partly on earth. And he also issues a series of peremptory commands, especially  negative commands, to Indra from verse 5ab through verse 8, which ends with a  plea not to split our “eggs” or our “cups,” in our opinion male and female genitalia  respectively. The final verse (9) is again a simple invitation to soma.  
The problematic verses 3–5ab need to be interpreted within this outer frame work, the context of Indra’s martial aid to the embattled Ārya. Our interpretation  of these verses is quite speculative and differs from those of others, but we have  attempted to construct a coherent account, while supplying as little extraneous  material as possible. What is immediately striking about the first of these verses  (3) is the presence of two female figures, the “two maidens of Kuyava,” who are  obviously rivers. More rivers appear in the second half of the next verse (4cd).  Now the advance of the Ārya is often obstructed by rivers, which must be forded  (see esp. III.33), and important battles are fought beside these barrier rivers (see  esp. VII.18). The two maidens of Kuyava thus could be rivers initially controlled  by forces impeding the progress of the Ārya. The charming image of the foamy riv  
ers “bathing in milk” turns swiftly cruel: “may they both be smashed,” perhaps a  reference to their violent confluence with a mightier river still, the Śiphā (otherwise  unknown). This verse reminds us of V.30.9, in another Indra hymn, in which Indra  confronts an enemy who “made women his weapons” and who has two streams,  perhaps the same rivers as here. Once Indra recognizes the situation, he initiates  battle.  

> 30.9 Because the Dāsa made women his weapons, what can they do to me?  His armies lack strength.  

Since he [=Indra] distinguished both his [=Dāsa’s?] streams, therefore Indra  advanced on the Dasyu to fight. The point may be that though rivers are formidable natural obstructions, they are  also, by grammatical gender, feminine, and females are, by nature, weak. Conceiving  of rivers as women robs them of their power and allows them to be overcome. The  analogue of Indra’s distinguishing the streams in V.30.9 may be found in our verse  5ab, where the “guide” of the Dasyu, which we interpret both physically as the  streambed and metaphorically as his strategy, is revealed. It is another female who  reveals and recognizes it, and, on the basis of shared lexicon, we think that Dawn  is the figure lurking behind this unidentified feminine. Dawn regularly makes things  visible and knows the way forward, and here she leads the Aryan forces to the very  seat of the enemy.  
These Ārya forces are personified in Āyu in verse 4ab. His “navel” has been  effaced for two reasons. On the one hand, the mythic hero Āyu is the son of the  Apsaras Urvaśī and the mortal king Purūravas, but his lot was cast with mortals  when his mother abandoned him (see X.95), and in this sense his true origins have  been, at the least, muddied. But there is a more positive aspect to this phrase; since  he and the other Ārya continue to move forward into ever new territory, where they  came from recedes into the background: their future is forward.  
What remains to be explained is the emphasis on the rivers’ “carrying away”  (áva-√bhR̥3a, 3b; √bhR̥4b). Here we feel there may be a latent ritual reference. The  “final bath” (avabhr̥thá, a derivative of áva-√bhr̥) of the sacrificer and his wife at  the end of the classical śrauta ritual is purificatory, removing all ritual pollution.  And it is a commonplace in Vedic that rivers and moving waters in general carry  away stain. The mention of bathing in 3c, combined with the emphasis on “carry  
ing away,” suggests that a notion of expiation and ritual cleansing has been super imposed on this battle scene. What is not clear is what is being carried away. Is it  pollution produced by some offense of the enemy? An even more speculative idea  is inspired by the mention of “foam” (phénam 3b): in a well-known myth Indra cuts  off the head of the demon Namuci with the foam of waters (see VIII.14.13), having  tricked him by forswearing all conventional weapons. It is possible that the rivers  here are carrying away the defilement that Indra acquired from this underhanded  killing. It is worthy of note that the Namuci myth is treated in V.30.7–8, right before  the verse cited above about enemy streams.  
The last word has not been said about this dense and fascinating hymn, but we  hope to have advanced the discussion.
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

Indra
</details>
