+++
title = "+042"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ मम द्विता ' इति दशर्चं दशमं सूक्तम् । पुरुकुत्सस्य पुत्रस्त्रसदस्यू राजर्षिः । आद्यासु षट्स्वात्मनः स्तुत्यत्वात् आत्मा देवता । अवशिष्टानां चतसृणामिन्द्रावरुणौ देवता । त्रिष्टुप् छन्दः । अत्रानुक्रमणिका- मम द्विता दश त्रसदस्युः 'पौरुकुत्स्यः षळाद्या आत्मस्तवः' इति । उक्तो विनियोगः पूर्वसूक्ते ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

42 (338)  
Indra and Varuṇa  
Trasadasyu Paurukutsya  
10 verses: triṣṭubh  
According to the Anukramaṇī, the author of this hymn is King Trasadasyu, and the  first six verses are his own self-praise. Beginning from a similar premise, Lommel  (1951) argues that verses 1–6 were spoken by King Trasadasyu on the occasion of  his royal consecration. Lommel points out that in the later royal consecration rite,  the king is compared to both Varuṇa as dharmapati “lord of dharma” and to Indra  as vr̥trahan “smasher of Vr̥tra.” Thus Trasadasyu identifies himself as both Indra  and Varuṇa, and because of these identifications the poet of the hymn affirms that  the king is “half a god” (vs. 8). Schmidt (1992) elaborated on this thesis, locating the  hymn in a different ritual context. He argues that according to later Vedic tradition  Varuṇa and Indra are dominant in different seasons, and this alternation between  the two gods is visible in this hymn. So according to Schmidt (1992: 340), “King  Trasadasyu impersonates both Varuṇa and Indra by performing their functions  according to the demands of the seasons.” This hymn marks the transition from the  settled period, in which the king enacts the role of Varuṇa, to the period of raiding  and battle, when he becomes Indra. Thus it begins with the king’s identification  with Varuṇa, but “in the third stanza the king affirms that he is not only Varuṇa but  also Indra and thus announces the transition to his Indra-like activities which he  details in the fifth and sixth stanza.” However the ritual context is interpreted, the  hymn provides insight into the nature of kingship in the R̥gvedic period.  
It is not clear whose voice it is in verse 7. For Lommel it is the poet; for Geldner  and Renou, Varuṇa. Schmidt (1992: 341) offers the interesting suggestion that these  two possibilities need not exclude one another if at this point in the rite or at this  time of the year, a priest impersonates Varuṇa. He surmises that when the king left  for war, he installed a caretaker in the settlement, represented here by the poet. Verse 8 refers to a legend about the birth of Trasadasyu, but its details are  uncertain. According to Sieg (1902:  97–98), following a tradition mentioned in  Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa XIII.5.4.5, Purukutsa performed a Horse Sacrifice with a  horse named Daurgaha, and his son Trasadasyu was born as a result. As Lommel  (1951: 37) points out, this reference to Trasadasyu’s birth would have enhanced his  dignity and further justified his identification with Indra and Varuṇa because of  the favor those gods showed to his mother. Sāyaṇa gives another, less likely ver  
sion of the legend. According to this version, King Purukutsa Daurgaha had been  captured. Seeing that the kingdom was left without a king, the principal wife of  Purukutsa appealed to the Seven Seers, who offered a sacrifice to Indra and Varuṇa  on her behalf, and the gods then gave her Trasadasyu as her son.  
In the final verses (9 and 10) the poet addresses Indra and Varuṇa in a dual  dvandva compound indrāvaruṇā, which signals the gods’ close connection to one  another. Thus, while the rest of the hymn describes the two sides of kingship,  these last verses emphasize the unity of the kingship represented by the two gods  and their union in King Trasadasyu. The poet’s final request for a cow “that does  not kick” (ánapasphurantī) may be explained by its possible double meaning. On  the one hand, a cow that doesn’t kick is one that is easy to milk and therefore  represents the prosperity that the poet hopes for (10a). On the other hand, as  Renou notes, the description “never kicking” (ánapasphur) is applied to the soma  when it is compared to a cow in VIII.69.10. So then the cow in this verse may  also be good soma, which will “elate” the gods (10b). Therefore, the cow “that  does not kick” is both the successful sacrificial performance and the successful  result of the sacrifice.
</details>
