+++
title = "01 ये शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य"

+++
17.1 Tu, but; of Krsna, ka, what; is the nistha, state; tesam, of
those-whosoever they may be; ye, who; being anvitah, endued; sraddhaya,
with faith, with the idea that there is something hereafter; yajante,
adore gods and others; utsriya, by ignoring, setting aside;
sastra-vidhim, the unjunctions of the scriptures, the injunctions of the
Vedas and the Smrtis; Is the state of those who are such sattvam,
sattva; aho, or; rajah, rajas; or tamah, tamas; This is what is meant:
Does the adoration of gods and others that they undertake come under the
category of sattva or rajas or tamas; By 'those who, endued with faith,
adore by ignoring the injunctions of the scriptures' are here meant
those who, not finding any injunction which can be characterized as
'enjoined by the Vedas' 'or enjoined by the Smrtis', worship gods and
others by merely observing the conduct of their elders. But, on the
other hand, those who, though aware of some scriptural injunction,
discard them and worship the gods and others in ways contrary to the
injunctions, are not meant here by 'those who, ignoring scriptural
injunctions, adore৷৷.' Why; Because of the alifying phrase, 'being
endued with faith'. For, it cannot be imagined that even when they are
aware of some scriptural injunction about worship of gods and others,
they discard this out of their faithlessness, and yet they engage in the
worship of gods and others enjoined by those scriptures by becoming
imbued with faith! Therefore, by 'those who, endued with faith, adore by
ignoring the injunctions of the scriptures' are here meant those very
ones mentioned earlier. An answer to this estion relating to a general
topic cannot be given without splitting it up. Hence,-
