+++
title = "15 अनुद्वेगकरं वाक्यम्"

+++
17.15 Yat, that; vakyam, speech; anudvegakaram, which causes no pain,
which is not hurtful to creatures which is satyam, true; priya-hitam,
agreeable and beneficial with regard to facts seen or unseen-. 'Speech'
is alified by characteristics such as being not hurtful, etc. The ca
(and) is used for grouping together the alifying characteristics. When a
sentence is used in order to make another understand, if it happens to
be avoid of one or two or three among the alities-truthfulness,
agreeability, beneficialness, and non-hurtfulness-, then it is not
austerity of speech. As in the case of a truthful utterance there would
occur a want of austerity of speech if it be lacking in one or two or
three of the others, so also in the case of an agreeable utterance there
would be no austerity of speech were it ot be without one or two or
three of the others; and similarly, there would be no austerity of
speech even in a beneficial utterance which is without one or two or
three of the others. What, again, is that austerity (of speech); That
utterance which is true as also not hurtful, and is agreeable and
beneficial, is the highest austerity of speech: As for example, the
utterance, 'Be calm, my boy. Practise study and yoga. Thery you will
gain the highest.' Svadhyaya-abhyasanam, the practice of the study of
scriptures, as is enjoined; ca eva, as well; ucyate, in said to be;
tapah, austerity; vanmayam, of speech.
