+++
title = "+132"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

' ईजानम् ' इति सप्तर्चं चतुर्थं सूक्तं नृमेधपुत्रस्य शकपूतस्यार्षं  मित्रावरुणदेवताकम् । आद्या तु लिङ्गोक्तद्युभूम्यश्विदेवताका न्यङ्कुसारिणी द्वितीयद्वादशकत्र्यष्टकवती । द्वितीयाषष्ठ्यौ  प्रस्तारपङ्क्ती द्विद्वादशकद्व्यष्टकवती । सप्तमी महासतोबृहती त्र्यष्टकद्विद्वादशकवती । शिष्टास्तिस्रो विराड्रूपा एकादशिनस्त्रयोऽष्टकश्चेति लक्षणलक्षिताः । तथा चानुक्रान्तम् -' ईजानं शकपूतो नार्मेधो मैत्रावरुणं न्यङ्कुसारिण्याद्या लिङ्गोक्तदेवतान्त्या महासतोबृहत्युपाद्योपान्त्ये प्रस्तारपङ्क्ती शेषा विराड्रूपाः ' हति । गतो विनियोगः ।।
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

132 (958)  
Mitra and Varuṇa  
Śākapūta Nārmedha  
7 verses: nyaṅkusāriṇī 1, prastārapaṅkti 2, 6, virāḍrūpā 3–5, mahāsatobr̥hatī 7  

This metrically messy hymn is, one must say, a mess in every other way as well.  Given the serious disturbances in the meter, it is quite possible that many of the  problems in the hymn result from faulty transmission, but we must translate what  we have, not what we wish we had. At this point it is impossible to produce a satisfying account of the purport of the whole hymn and of its many puzzles of detail, but  it is also not possible to supply even a tentative translation without having a prior  hypothesis about the underlying aim of the composition. Geldner suggests that a  specific political story lies behind it, full of sin, murder, and regal intrigue, but his  sketch of this scenario is not convincing.  

Our own hypothesis is less dramatic, though perhaps equally unconvincing.  We believe that it reflects the ritual innovation happening during this late R̥gvedic  period that split the earlier role(s) of sacrificing priest-poet into what in classical  śrauta ritual are the “Sacrificer” (Yajamāna, lit. “the one sacrificing for himself”),  who actually has little active participation in the sacrifice but provides the material support for it, and the working priests who are the actual physical and ver bal performers of sacrifice. The new “Sacrificer” in part takes over the old role of  “patron” (sūrí), but maintains a more organic connection to the sacrifice. In this  hymn this new type of Sacrificer is celebrated, as is his largesse to us, the working  priests. Divine models for this split role with complementary duties are provided in  the hymn—primarily by Mitra and Varuṇa, the ostensible dedicands, but also by  Heaven and Earth (vss. 1 and 6, with Heaven also paired with Varuṇa in vs. 4) and  the Aśvins (vs. 1).  

Perhaps the best support for our views is the first verse, which contains three  fronted repetitions of the perfect middle participle ījāná “having performed sacrifice  for himself,” the perfect-stem equivalent of the present middle participle yájamāna “sacrificing for himself” that is substantivized to become the title Sacrificer. This  figure is the object of the ministrations of both Heaven and Earth (ab) and the  Aśvins (cd). The first half of verse 2 contrastively introduces “us,” the priests who  are sacrificing (in the active voice, yajāmasi) at the prompting, presumably, of the  Sacrificer, who appears in the second half of the verse, in the guise of another middle participle, krāṇá “performing (ritual) for himself.” Mitra and Varuṇa bestow  their favors on both parties and assure their joint victory over demonic forces. Verse 3 is particularly challenging and has received numerous clashing interpre tations, but we believe that it continues the theme of complementary roles and in  fact introduces the motif of the Sacrificer’s gifts to the priests. In our view “we,”  in our priestly role, are seeking to attract Mitra and Varuṇa to the sacrifice (pāda  a), while the Sacrificer is represented as the giver in pāda c, with pāda d express ing the hope or expectation that no one can disrupt his gifts to us. Complicating the interpretation is the rare and rather charged word réknas “legacy.” However,  réknas is several times used of what we gain from the gods at the sacrifice (e.g.,  I.31.5, 121.5, VI.20.7); in keeping with its etymology (from the root ric “leave”), it  can be viewed as what was “left behind” by the gods at the sacrifice, and both the  priests and the Sacrificer should receive it, as they both seem to in pādas b and c  respectively.  

Serious impediments to our (or anyone else’s) interpretation arise in the following verses, especially the second half of verse 4 through the first half of verse 5. The  first half of verse 5, in a twist on the classic “the one ...the other” (anyá ... anyá)  construction typically used to depict the complementary functions of two indi viduals, posits the shared or successive kingship of Heaven and Varuṇa. In pāda 4c  Varuṇa, addressed in the 2nd person, or Varuṇa or someone else, presented in the  3rd person (the verb is ambiguous), “takes pleasure in the chariot.” The chariot  could be the chariot of the sacrifice, found also in verse 7b, or the war chariot.  The latter seems more likely in the context of the next pāda and the first hemistich  of verse 5 and gains resonance from other features of the god Varuṇa. Pāda 5d  states that “It is not by such a transgression that (a man) is (called) ‘oath-breaker’”  (following the reading āntakadhrúk of Eichner-Kühn [1982], who connected it  to the seṭ root am “pledge, swear,” rather than the previously standard interpre tation antaka). What transgression? If it is what is found in the previous pāda,  taking pleasure in the chariot, it might be a very oblique reference to Varuṇa’s  standard functions. It is well known that Varuṇa and Indra often share kingship  (see the famous dialogue hymn IV.42), with Indra functioning as king in times of  war, Varuṇa in times of peace. If Varuṇa is taking pleasure in the war chariot, his  behavior is uncharacteristic and could indeed be considered transgressive, but, the  poet tells us, it would not be sufficiently serious to constitute a breach of his nor mal duties, would not be an oath-breaking infraction. His unaccustomed behavior  points to the theme of the hymn, by implication: each member of a pair has his  own sphere and venturing out of that sphere may invite suspicion or even blame.  (Alternatively, if the subject of pāda c is an unidentified third person, the pleasure  that person/god takes in the war-chariot would not brand him as one who has  violated his oath to Varuṇa.)  

What would be a sufficient transgression is laid out in 5ab and attributed to an  individual derogatorily named “Shit-purified” (Śakapūta)—namely, treacherously  continuing to attack fallen warriors after a peace-treaty has been concluded. Even  if our speculations about the meaning of 4cd–5ab are correct (and there are alternative interpretations; for example that 4ab refers to the passing of power from Father  Sky [Dyaus Pitar] to gods such as Varuṇa and Indra possibly depicted in X.124), it  is difficult to understand why this bitter little anecdote was inserted into the hymn  at this point and just as quickly dropped. Note, by the way, that the Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to Śakapūta, but it is almost certainly the case that this name  was simply plucked from the hymn itself. The Anukramaṇī’s patronymic Nārmedha  has a better chance of conforming to fact, as the name Nr̥medha is found in the final verse, where poets typically name themselves, and a Nr̥medha Āngirasa is the  supposed poet of several other hymns (VIII.89–90, 98–99; IX.27, 29; VIII.90 shows  some parallels to our hymn).  

The rest of verse 5 and all of verse 6 appear to concern the present sacrifice,  where the pair Mitra and Varuṇa are to be found, as well as Heaven and Earth  (in a simile)—in addition to Agni and Aditi, for good measure. Again, there are a  number of difficulties in the details. The first half of the final verse (7) also takes  place at the sacrifice, and it seems to reaffirm the split roles of Sacrificer and priest  that we claim provide the subject for the hymn. The “two ruling over property” in  pāda a are, of course, Mitra and Varuṇa, but they also represent the Sacrificer-patron  figure, while the unnamed subject of pāda b is the actual priestly officiant who will  direct the chariot of the sacrifice.  

We would be perfectly happy if the hymn had ended with 7b, for the last hemis tich presents yet another unsolvable challenge. As noted above, the poet (if that’s  who it is) Nr̥medha names himself in this half-verse, also under the punning desig nation Sumedha. But the nature of the exploit he boasts of—the rescue of a certain  set of females (or feminine-gender items)—must remain opaque, because the word  characterizing the rescued is an impossible hapax, a plural present participle to  an apparent denominative verb meaning “seek/behave as/perform kaṇūka,” a word  with no etymology or apparent relatives. Following Sāyaṇa, most modern translators render it as “lamenting,” but this was clearly a desperate, though contextually  plausible, guess on the part of Sāyaṇa, and it seems better to leave the poet’s punning wordplay or contemporary reference untranslated.
</details>
