+++
title = "005 ऋतम् उञ्छ-शिलम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Gleaning and picking is to be known as “Truth;” and what is obtained unasked, “Nectar”; alms obtained by begging is “Death,” and cultivation is declared to be “Super- death.”—(5)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उञ्छश् च शिलश् च **उञ्छशिलम्** । तद् **ऋतं** **ज्ञेयं** सत्यव्रततुल्यम् । क्षेत्राल् लूनस्य व्रीह्यादेर् गृहं खलं वा नीयमानस्य यः पुलाकः पतितः स्वामिनो ऽनपेक्षितस् तस्योच्चयनम् **उञ्छः**, तद् **ऋतम्** । न तत्रेयं बुद्धिर् आधेया- "परकीयम् एतत्, न गृह्णामि" इति । एवं च खलात्[^११] परिभ्रष्टस्य लूनस्यालूनस्य वानेकप्ररोहवतो ग्रहणं **शिलः** । 


[^११]:
     M G: svatvāt

- **अमृतं स्याद् अयाचितम्**, अत्यन्तप्रीतिकरत्वात् । **मृतम्** इव **याचितम्** भैक्षम्[^१२] इति । याचितम् इत्य् एव सिद्धे भैक्षशब्देन सामूहिकतद्धितान्तेन बहवो याचितव्या इत्य् उच्यते, नैकः कदर्थनीयः । तद् उक्तम्- "अल्पद्रोहेण" (म्ध् ४.२) इति । प्रायेण च भैक्षशब्दस्य "भैक्ष्याश्य् आत्मविशुद्ध्यर्थम्"[^१३] (म्ध् ११.७१) इत्य् एवमादौ सिद्धान्नविषये प्रयोगसिद्धेः, सामान्यविषयार्थं याचितशब्दोपादानम् । तेन नेदं सिद्धान्नभिक्षणम् एव, अग्निमतः पराग्निपक्वेन वैश्वदेवादिविरोधात् । न चेदं भोजनार्थम् एव भिक्षणम्, किं तर्हि, स्थित्यर्थम् । स्थितिश् च न भोजनमात्रसाध्या गृहस्थस्य, किं तर्हि, यावत्[^१४] किंचिद् गृहोपयोगि । अत एधोदकपरिधानाद्य्[^१५] अपि भिक्षितव्यम्, गृहोपकरणं च स्थाल्यपिधानादि । ब्रह्मचारिणस् तु भोजनकाले विधिना पाकासंभवान् नियमतः सिद्धान्नविषयं भैक्ष्यं प्रतीयते । भिक्षाशब्दश् चायं भिक्ष्यमाणद्रव्यगतं परिमाणम् अप्य् आचष्टे । भिक्षामात्रं न ददाति याचितः, प्रसृतिमात्रं भिक्षेति । तेन गोहिरण्यादिभिक्षणं न प्रसृतशब्देनाभ्यनुज्ञायते,[^१६] प्रतिग्रहाद्यर्था[^१७] याच्ञेति ।


[^१७]:
     DK (5: 1161) suggests: apratigrahādyarthā


[^१६]:
     DK (5: 1161) suggests: amṛtaśabde-


[^१५]:
     M G J: evodaka- (I follow DK 5: 1161)


[^१४]:
     M G: yat


[^१३]:
     M G J: bhaikṣyasyātma-


[^१२]:
     M G: bhaikṣitam

- <u>ननु</u> भैक्षग्रहणम् अपि प्रतिग्रह एव । 

- <u>नैवम्,</u>[^१८] ग्रहणमात्रं प्रतिग्रहः । विशिष्ट एव स्वीकारे प्रतिपूर्वो गृह्णातिर् वर्तते । तेन न स्वीकारमात्रे । "प्रतिग्रहसमर्थो ऽपि" (म्ध् ४.१८६) "प्रतिग्रहः प्रत्यवरः" (म्ध् १०.१०९) इति, अदृष्टबुद्ध्या दीयमानं मन्त्रपूर्वं गृह्णतः प्रतिग्रहो भवति । न च भैक्षे "देवस्य त्वा" (व्स् २.११) आदिमन्त्रोच्चारणम् अस्ति, न च प्रीत्यादिना दानग्रहणे । न च तत्र प्रतिग्रहव्यवहारः । 


[^१८]:
     DK (5L 1161): naiva

- अतः प्रतिग्रहाद् अर्थान्तरम् एवेदं मृतामृतशब्दाभिधेयम्[^१९] । अतश् च नात्र याच्यमानस्य अयाच्यमानस्य वा महासत्त्वतया उपकारान्तरापेक्षा जायते, येन वा ददतो जात्याद्यपेक्षा युक्तिमती[^२०] प्रतिग्राह्यस्य । एवं करुणया[^२१] च प्रदीयमानं गृह्णतो न प्रतिग्रहः ।


[^२१]:
     M G J: pratigrāhyasyaiva karuṇayā


[^२०]:
     M G 1st ed.: yuktimatā


[^१९]:
     M G J: evedam ṛtāmṛta- (I follow DK 5: 1161; see the same expression in the last paragraph)

- <u>ननु</u> च करुणया दानम् अदृष्टायैव ।

- <u>नेति</u> ब्रूमः । न च तत्र दानधर्मः, किं तर्हि, करुणाभ्यासात् परोपकाराद् वा । तत्र यथा हितोपदेशादाव् अनुग्राह्यस्य[^२२] विधिर् जात्यादि[^२३] नापेक्षते तद्वत् करुणया दाने । तथा च शिष्टा नैवंविधे दाने "वेदतत्त्वार्थविदुषे ब्राह्मणाय" (म्ध् ३.८६) इत्य् एतद् अनुरुध्यन्ते । अत एवाब्राह्मणा अपि दैन्यम् आपन्नाः परेण दत्तं गृह्णाना न ब्राह्मणवृत्तिं[^२४] प्रतिग्रहम् आश्रिता भवन्ति । 


[^२४]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vṛttaṃ


[^२३]:
     M G: jātyādir


[^२२]:
     M G 1st ed add: yathā

- स्थितम् एतत् । प्रतिग्रहे यद्य् अपि याचितायाचितपूर्वकत्वं विद्यते तथापि न तेनैव मृतामृतशब्दार्थः, विषयान्तरस्य दर्शितत्वात् । याजनाध्यापनयोर् अप्य् एतद् रूपम् अस्ति । कश्चिद् याजयित्वा याजकत्वं लभते, कश्चित् प्रार्थ्यते । एवम् अध्यापने योज्यम् । अतो यावता काचिद् वृत्तिर् याच्ञया[^२५] सा दैन्यावहत्वात् मरणम् इवेति मृतशब्देनाभिधीयते । कर्षणं तु मरणाद् अपि पापीयः । लाङ्गलाकर्षणं हि भारवाहत्वम् । तच् च खलु जनपदकर्म[^२६] ॥ ४.५ ॥


[^२६]:
     M G J: khalajanapadakarma (I follow DK 5: 1162)


[^२५]:
     M G: yāñcā yā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The corn that is gleaned is to be known as ‘Truth;’ living by this means
being regarded as equal to the strict observance of truth. When after
harvesting, corn is being carried either home or to the granary, if
certain ears of corn fall down on the ground, and are left by the
owner’—the picking up of these is what is called “gleaning;” and this is
called ‘Truth;’ and in regard to this, one need not entertain any such
idea as ‘this belongs to another person, so I shall not take it.’

Similarly, when one takes away what has fallen off from the sheaf—either
before or after harvesting,—and what forms part of several
offshoots,—this is ‘picking.’

‘*What is obtained unasked is* *Nectar*’—so called, because it is a
source of great pleasure.

‘*The alms obtained by begging is Death*.’— The term ‘begging’ itself
signifying the fact of what is obtained being ‘alms,’ the addition of
this latter term—which is formed by the adding of a Nominal Affix
denoting a *group* or *collection*,—is meant to imply that several
persons shall be begged, and no single person shall be constantly
troubled, as is shown by what has been said above regarding ‘what
involves very little trouble to living beings.’ Then again, as a rule,
the term ‘*bhaikṣa*,’ ‘alms,’ is found to be used in the sense of
*cooked food*; as we find in the case of such passages as—‘for the
purpose of cleansing oneself from *alms*;’ hence the adding of the term
‘begging’ serves to indicate that ‘alms’ stands here for *food in
general*; hence what is meant here is not *cooked food* only; specially
as for one who has set up the Fire, it would be wrong to make the
*Vaiśvadeva* and other offerings with food cooked in any other fire.

The begging of alms here spoken of is not meant to be that only which is
got for eating; it stands for what enables the man to maintain himself;
and the maintenance of the householder is not accomplished merely by
eating; in fact, it requires all such things as are necessary for
house-keeping; hence it is that water-vessels and other such articles
should also be begged; as also such household-requisites as dishes and
covers, etc. So far as the Student is concerned, since for him it is
impossible that just at the time of his eating, cooking should be done
in the proper manner;—it follows that in his case ‘alms’ must mean
*cooked food* only.

The term ‘*bhikṣā*,’ ‘alms,’ also indicates the quantity of the article
obtained by begging; this quantity being a mere *handful*. But when a
man is begged, he does not give mere alms, a mere handful; so that the
begging of the cow, gold and such other things could not be regarded as
sanctioned by the mere ‘handful.’ In fact, begging is always done for
the purpose of receiving all kinds of gifts.

“The receiving of *alms* also would be a receiving of gifts.”

No; mere acceptance does not constitute the ‘receiving of gifts;’ the
root ‘*graha*,’ with the preposition ‘*prati*,’—*i.e*., the term
‘*pratigraha*,’ ‘receiving of gifts’—is applied to a particular form of
‘acceptance,’ and not to any and every *acceptance*. Wherever the term
‘*pratigraha*,’ ‘gift,’ is used—*e. g*., under 4.186 and 10.100—it is
used in the sense of such *gift* as is offered with a view to some
transcendental result, and is received with due *mantras*. In the
receiving of mere ‘*alms*,’ however, there is no reciting of any such
*mantra* as ‘*devasya tvā, etc*.’ Nor again, is the term applied to the
accepting of friendly and other presents; in the sense of this latter,
the term is never used.

From all this it follows that the terms ‘Truth’ and ‘Nectar’ are used in
the sense of things other than ‘gifts.’ Hence, in this case, the man who
gives, whether begged or un-begged, is a high-souled person, and, hence,
in his mind there does not arise any desire for any form of return (for
the gift he makes); so that there would be no grounds for any
restriction as to the caste, etc., of the recipient or giver. When a
present is made entirely through sympathy for the receiver, it does not
become a ‘gift’ (which always connotes the presence of desire for some
transcendental result).

“But what is given through sympathy or pity is also conducive to
transcendental results.”

We say—no; because it does not fulfil the conditions of ‘*dāna*,’
‘giving’ (formal); it being prompted either by pity or by the desire to
do good to others. Hence, just as in offering advice, through sympathy,
considerations of caste do not come in; so in the case of giving through
pity also. It is for this reason that in the case of such giving,
cultured people do not observe any such restrictions as ‘gifts should be
offered to the Brāhmaṇa who knows the real meaning of the Veda,’ and so
forth. It is for this same reason, again, that even non-Brāhmaṇas, on
becoming poor, accept gifts offered by others, but are not, on that
account, regarded as having ‘received gifts,’ and thus transgressed upon
the Brāhmaṇas ‘livelihood.’

The conclusion, therefore, is as follows:—Though in the regular
‘*gift*,’ considerations of its being *asked* or *unasked* do come in,
yet it does not, merely on that account, become either ‘Truth’ or
‘Nectar;’ because it has been shown that these terms have a different
connotation.

This same connotation is applicable to ‘officiating at sacrifices’ and
‘teaching’ (the other two means of livelihood for the Brāhmaṇa): Some
one obtains the post of officiating at a sacrifice after having begged
for it from some one. Similarly with the work of Teaching also.

Any such means of living as is obtained by begging, involves
humiliation; and hence, resembling death, it is called ‘death.’

Cultivating is worse even than Death; specially as the act of ploughing
and carrying of burdens is the work of lower people.—(5)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 309), which
explains the difference between ‘*uñcha*’ and ‘*śila*’ by taking ṭhe
former to mean the picking up *of single grains*, of corn and the latter
that of ears of com fallen on the ground;—and in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II,
p. 246).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 4.5-6)  
**

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (1.2.25.23).—‘He may live either by *Nectar* or by *Death;
Nectar* is that which is obtained unasked, and *Death* is the alms
obtained by begging.’

*Bṛhad-Yama* (60, 62).—‘The Brāhmaṇa is ruined by serving the king.
Those Brāhmaṇas who serve such masters as should not be served, and who
officiate at sacrifices for those for whom it should not be done, are to
be regarded as *impure* and beyond the pale of all Dharma.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.27).—‘When unable to maintain himself by means of his own
occupations, he shall never have recourse to a sinful occupation.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.25).—‘In abnormal times of distress, the Brāhmaṇa may
maintain himself by the occupation of the Kṣatriya, or by that of the
Vaiśya.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.15).—‘In times of distress, the occupation of the next
(caste).’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.69, 72).—‘Being unable to maintain himself by
teaching, officiating at sacrifices, and receiving of gifts, he shall
live by the occupation of the Kṣatriya; this being the next best for
him;—he may also have recourse to the occupation of the Vaiśya; this
being the next best.’

*Gautama* (7.6-7).—‘In the absence of the aforesaid, the occupation of
the Kṣatriya; in the absence of this latter also, the occupation of the
Vaiśya.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	By Rita shall be understood the gleaning of corn; by Amrita, what is given unasked; by Mrita, food obtained by begging and agriculture is declared to be Pramrita.
</details>
