+++
title = "007 कुसूल-धान्यको वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall be either one possessing a granary full of grains, or one possessing a jar full of grains; he may be one possessing what is wanted for three days, or one who does not possess enough for the morrow.—(7)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तम्- आत्मकुटुम्बस्थित्यै धनसंचयः कार्यः, न भोगाय क्लेश आश्रयणीयः । तत् तु किम् अन्वहम् अर्जनीयम्, उतैकदैव चिरकालपर्याप्तम् इति, नोक्तम् । तत्र कालविलम्बार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते । 

- कुसूले धान्यम् अस्येति गमकत्वाद् व्यधिकरणो बहुव्रीहिः । पाठान्तरम् "कुशूलधान्यकः" इति । कुसूलपरिमितं धान्यं कुसूलधान्यम्, तद् अस्यास्तीति मत्वर्थीय इकशब्दः । धान्याधिकरणम् इष्टकादिकृतं कुसूलः कोष्ठ इति चोच्यते । तेन चात्र परिमाणं[^२७] लक्ष्यते । तत्र यावन् माति तावत् संचेतव्यम् । न पुनर् आधारनियमो ऽस्ति । कुसूलेन[^२८] च महापरिग्रहणस्यापि बहुभृत्यबन्धुदारदासपुत्रगवाश्वादिमतो ऽपि यावता सांवत्सरी स्थितिर् भवति तावद् अनुज्ञायते । यतो वक्ष्यति "यस्य त्रैवार्षिकं भक्तम्" (म्ध् ११.७) इति । **धान्य**ग्रहणम् अप्य् अविवक्षितम् । सुवर्णरूप्याद्य् अपि तावत्याः स्थितेः पर्याप्तम् अर्जयतो न दोषः । सर्वथाधिकं ततो नार्जनीयम् इति वाक्यार्थः ।


[^२८]:
     M G: kusūle


[^२७]:
     M G 1st ed.: cātrāparimāṇaṃ

- **कुम्भी** उष्ट्रिका । षण्मासिको निचय एतेन प्रतिपाद्यत इति स्मरन्ति । त्र्यहम् ऐहिकम् अस्येति **त्र्यहैहिकः** । कुटुम्बस्य नित्यकर्मार्थं च भक्तचयं करोति यः स **त्र्यहैहिकः** । श्वो भवं श्वस्तनं भक्तम्, तद् अस्यास्तीति पूर्ववत् मत्वर्थीयं कृत्वा नञ्समासः कर्तव्यः । सद्यस् तात्कालिको भवेत् । तदहरर्जितं व्ययीकर्तव्यम् ॥ ४.७ ॥

_अस्य विकल्पस्य व्यवस्थाम् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared that wealth should be accumulated for the
maintenance of oneself and family; and no trouble shall be undertaken
for mere pleasure; it has not been said whether the man is to acquire
wealth day by day, or only once, sufficient to last for a long time.
Hence the Text now proceeds to show how one is to earn a living lasting
for some length of time.

‘*Kusūladhānyakaḥ*.’—One who has grains in a granary; the compound being
a *Bahuvrīhi*, where the members are not in apposition to each other.

Another reading is ‘*Kusūladhānyikaḥ*;’ in which case, the term
*Kusūladhānya* would mean ‘grains enough to fill a granary;’ and one who
possesses this would be ‘*Kusūladhānyika*;’ the word being formed with
the Possessive affix ‘*ik*.’

Receptacles built of bricks and such things, which contain grains, are
called ‘*Kusūla*’ or ‘*Koṣṭha*,’ ‘granary;’ and this term serves to
indicate the quantity; the sense being that ‘one shall accumulate grains
in such quantities as may fill a granary and it does not mean that ‘he
must use the *granary only* as the receptacle for grains.’ What the text
permits, by means of the word ‘granary,’ is the accumulating of just
that quantity of grain which may suffice to maintain for one year the
family of a man with large responsibilities, having a large number of
servants, relations, wives, slaves, children, cattle, horse, and such
other things. That such is the sense, is shown by what is going to be
said (in 11.7) regarding the man who has grains sufficient for three
years.

Significance is not meant to be attached to the term ‘grains’ also; in
fact, there would be nothing wrong in the man acquiring such quantities
of gold, silver and such things as would suffice for the said
maintenance. All that the text means is that one should not accumulate
more than that.

‘*Kumbhī*’ is the same ‘*uṣṭṛka*,’ ‘jar.’ They say that this stands for
such quantity as would suffice for six months.

‘*Trayahaihika*;’—‘*aihika*’ means ‘*wanted*;’ he who has what is wanted
for three days is ‘*trayahaihika*;’ which is the name given to one who
collects what is enough for the requirements of his family for three
days.

‘*Śvastana*’ is *what is needed for the morrow*; he who possesses this
is, as before, ‘*Śvastanika*;’ and this compound, with the negative
particle, gives the term ‘*aśvastanika*;’ ‘who does not possess enough
for the morrow.’ The meaning is that he should acquire what just
suffices for the time, what he earns he should spend all that the same
day.—(7)

The author next states the law relating to the options just mentioned:—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kusūladhānyakaḥ*’—Having as much grain as is contained in a *Kusūla*,
a granary, *i*. *e*., enough to feed the household for *one year*’ (not
*three* as mentioned by Buhler) \[Medhātithi\];—‘enough to last twelve
days’ (Govindarāja);—‘enough for three years’ (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘enough for twelve, six or three months’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Kumbhīdhānyakaḥ*’—‘Having as much grain as may be contained in a
*Kumbhī*, *i.e*., enough to last for six months’ (Medhātithi);—‘enough
to last for six days’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa);—‘enough for one year’
(Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 169);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (on
1.128), which adds that this refers, not to all Brāhmaṇas, but to those
only who are ‘*yāyāvara*’ *i.e*., ‘who devote themselves entirely to
study, sacrifice and making gifts, and do not have recourse to teaching,
sacrificing for others and receiving gifts, or amassing of wealth’
(according to Devala);—also on 3.29, as describing the four kinds of
‘Householder’;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 216);—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II,
p. 246), which explains ‘*Kusūla*’ as ‘*Koṣṭhakam*,’—‘*Kumbhī*’ as
‘*aṣṭrikā*,’ and the whole compound as ‘one who possesses grain enough
to fill the one or the other’;—‘*tryahika*’ as ‘one who has grains
enough *to last for* three days,’ and ‘*aśvastana*’ as ‘one not having
grains for the morrow’;—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, p. 37a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 4.7-8)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.228).—‘He may be the possessor of a granary-full or a
jar-full of grains, or of grain enough for three days, or of grain not
enough for the morrow; or he may live by gleaning and picking; the
succeeding being superior to the preceding among these.’

*Laghu-Viṣṇu* (2.16-17).—‘The virtuous householders are divided into
four classes according to the difference in their means of livelihood;
of these the following is superior to the preceding. \[Three quarters of
Manu’s text being reproduced, the fourth part is read as
*sadyaḥprakṣālakaḥ*, one who had just enough for the last meal that he
has had.\]’

*Mahābhārata* (12.249.2-3).—‘Four kinds of livelihood for householders
have been described by the wise—the first is the possessing of a
granary-full of grains; then the possessing of a jar-full of grains;
then the possessing of not enough for the morrow; and the last is the
method of the pigeon (having nothing beyond the present meal); among
these the following is superior to the preceding.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	He may either possess enough to fill a granary, or a store filling a grain-jar; or he may collect what suffices for three days, or make no provision for the morrow.
</details>
