+++
title = "009 षट्-कर्मैको भवत्य्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From among these one follows the six occupations; another lives by three; one again with two; while the fourth lives by “Brahmasattra.’—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एषां** कुसूलधान्यकादीनां गृहस्थानाम् **एकः षट्कर्मा भवति** । यो महापरिग्रहः प्रागुक्तस् तस्य षड् वृत्तिकर्माणि भवन्ति । कानि पुनस् तानि । प्रकृतानि[^३२] उञ्छशिलायाचितयाचितलाभकृषिवाणिज्यानि । अध्यापनयाजनप्रतिग्रःआः[^३३] याचितायाचितग्रहणाद् अन्तर्भवन्ति । बहुकुटुम्बको नित्यकर्मसंपत्त्यर्थं च सर्वा वृत्तीः समुच्चिताः कुर्यात्, कृषिवाणिज्ये अपि । 


[^३३]:
     M G 1st ed.: -vāṇijyādhyāpanayājanapratigraḥāḥ


[^३२]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: prakṛtāni

- <u>ये ऽपि</u> "अध्यापनम् अध्ययनम्" (म्ध् १.८८) इत्यादीनि प्रथमाध्यायपठितानि षट्कर्माणि व्याचक्षते, <u>तेषां</u> प्रकरणविरोधो निष्प्रयोजनं वाध्ययनादीनाम्[^३४] उपादानम्, अन्यत्रैव तेषां विहितत्वात् ।


[^३४]:
     DK 5: 1165: cādhyayanādīnām

- **अन्यः** द्वितीयः कुंभीदान्यस् **त्रिभिः प्रवर्तते** । **प्रो** ऽनर्थकः, यावद् वर्तते तावत् प्रवर्तत इति । वर्तनं च स्थितिसंपत्तिः । प्रकृतानां च यानि कानिचित् क्वचित् कृषिवाणिज्ये विहाय । प्रशस्ततरो हि पूर्वस्मात् कुम्भीधान्यकः । यतो वक्ष्यति "सा वृत्तिः सद्विगर्हिता," (म्ध् १०.८४) "गोरक्षकान् वाणिजिकान्" (म्ध् ८.१०२) इति । यद् अप्य् उक्तं गौतमेन- "कृषिवाणिज्ये वास्वयंकृते कुसीदं च" (ग्ध् १०.५–६) इत्य् अनापद्य् एव । तत्राप्य् अस्वयंकरणपक्षे दोषो ऽस्त्य् एव, लघीयांस् तु भविष्यति ।

- **द्वाभ्याम् एकः** । अत्रापि याचितलाभं वर्जयित्वा त्रयाणां यथासंभवं द्वे गृह्येते । अयाचितम् अपि तावद् गृह्यते यावत् त्र्यहपर्याप्तम् । 

- **चतुर्थस् तु ब्रह्मसत्रेण जीवति** । ब्रह्मसत्रं शिलोञ्छयोर् अन्यतरा वृत्तिः । सततभवत्वात् सत्रम् इव, न तदहःपरिसमापनीया वृत्तिः, अतः सत्रम् इत्य् उच्यते, अहर् अहर् नित्यम् अनुष्ठानात् । ब्रह्मशब्दो ब्राह्मणपर्यायः । तेषाम् इदं सत्रम् । अस्माद् ब्रह्मशब्दात् पूर्वो ऽयं वृत्तिप्रपञ्चो ब्राह्मणविषय एव विज्ञेयः । क्षत्रियादीनां तु तत्र तत्र[^३५] वक्ष्यति ।


[^३५]:
     M G omit: one tatra

- <u>कथं</u> पुनः शिलोञ्छवृत्त्या जीवनं संभवति, यावता शरद्ग्रीष्मयोर् एव क्षेत्रे खले वा शिलपुलाकपातसंभवः । <u>अथोच्यते</u> । "ग्रैष्मेभ्यो ग्रैष्माणि, शारदानि शारदेभ्यो ऽर्जयिष्यति" इति । षाण्मासिकवृत्तिर् एव स्यात्, नाश्वस्तनिकः । अथान्यथापि संभवति यावतस् तावतो व्रीह्यादेः कथंचित् पतितस्योपादानम् । <u>सत्यम्</u> । न तद्भोजनाय पर्याप्तम् । संचिन्वानो यदा पर्याप्तं प्राप्स्यति तदाशिष्यति पञ्चाहाद्यसंभवात् । तथा च महाभारते शिलोञ्छवृत्तिः पक्षान्ताशनो वर्ण्यते । सो ऽयम् अस्याम् अवस्थायां गृहस्थस् तापसः संवृत्त इति चेत्, किं त्व् एवम् अप्य् अश्वस्तनिकत्वं विरुध्यते । यथोपपादस्थितिकस् तदा स्यात्, नाश्वस्तनिकः । अश्वस्तनिको ह्य् उच्यते य अहन्य् अहन्य् अर्जयति यात्रिकम्, तद् अहर् एव च व्ययीकरोति, न द्वितीये ऽह्णि स्थापयति । यदि च न प्रत्यहं शिलोञ्छवृत्तेर् भोजनं निवर्तते,[^३६] कुतो ऽश्वस्तनिको भवेत्, कथं च तथाविधस्य जीवनं पुत्रदारभरणं च ।


[^३६]:
     DK (5: 1166): nirvartate

- अत एव <u>केचित्</u> **त्रिभिर् अन्यः प्रवर्तत** इत्य् अत आरभ्यान्यथा व्याचक्षते । **त्रिभिर्** याजनाध्यापनप्रतिग्रहैः, द्वाभ्याम् "प्रतिग्रहः प्रत्यवरः" (म्ध् १०.१०९) इति प्रतिग्रहव्युदासेन याजनाध्यापने प्रतिगृह्येते । **ब्रह्मसत्रम्** अध्यापनम् । तद् धि वृत्तये पर्याप्तम् । यत् तु "वर्तयंश् च शिलोञ्छाभ्याम्" (म्ध् ४.१०) इति स चतुष्टयव्यतिरिक्तो ऽन्य एव । 

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । यः शिलपरिमाणान् दशद्वादशान् यवान् व्रीहीन् वा बहुभ्य आदत्ते यावद् एकाहयात्रिकं स शिलवृत्तिः । यस् त्व् एकैकं यात्रार्थम् आहरति स उञ्छवृत्तिः । स्मृत्यन्तरे चायं यायावरवृत्तिर्[^३७] उक्तः । अतश् च सार्वकालिकम् अप्य् उपपद्यते । न च वैश्वदेवादिक्रियाविरोधः, न च[^३८] पुत्रदाराणाम् अभरणदोषश्[^३९] च, याचितभैक्षाद् अत्यन्ताल्पग्रहणात् ॥ ४.९ ॥


[^३९]:
     M G: abharaṇabhedaś


[^३८]:
     M G: tatra


[^३७]:
     M G 1st ed.: jyāyān varavṛttir
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*From among these*’—from among the four kinds of householders, one
having a granary full of grains, and so forth,—‘*one follows the six
occupations*;’ *i.e*., the person with vast responsibilities described
above, follows all the six occupations.—“Which are these?”—These arc—(1)
gleanings, (2) pickings, (3) earning by begging, (4) earning without
begging, (5) agriculture and trade; ‘teaching,’ officiating at
sacrifices’ and ‘receiving gifts’ being included under ‘earning by
begging, and without begging.’ The man with a large family should have
recourse to all these occupations, for the due fulfilment of his daily
work; in fact he may have recourse to even agriculture and trade.

Some people explain the ‘six occupations’ of the present context as
standing for—‘Teaching, studying’ and the rest mentioned in Discourse I
(88). But this explanation is in-compatible with the context \[since
*Study, offering of sacrifices* and *making gifts* can nut be ‘means of
livelihood’\]; and further, there would be no point in prescribing
*study* and the rest here, they having been already enjoined elsewhere
(in 1.88 and in 10.75).

‘*Another*’—the second, who possesses a jar full of corns—‘*lives by
three*;’ the prefix ‘*pra*’ in ‘*pravartate*’ is superfluous;
‘*pravartate*’ standing for ‘*vartate*.’ Any three occupations of those
mentioned are meant here,—with the exception of Agriculture and Trade.

The person possessing only a jar full of corns is more commendable than
the former. Since it is going to be declared later on that—‘this means
of living has been deprecated by the good;’ this with reference to the
‘tending of cattle, trade,’ and so forth (8.102). Gautama has mentioned
(10.5-6)

‘Agriculture and Trade, not carried on by oneself, and money-lending’ as
permissible in normal times. But even when one carries on trade and
agriculture, not by oneself, but through others,—there is something
improper in this also; though the impropriety may be a small one.

‘*One lives with two*.’—Here also, leaving off ‘earning by begging,’ any
two of the six may be adopted. The acquiring of wealth *without begging*
also is permissible only to the extent of what may suffice for three
days.

‘*The fourth lives by Brahmasattra*.’—‘*Brahmasattra*’ stands for either
one of the two, ‘picking’ and ‘gleaning.’ These means of living are
called ‘*sattra*’ (Sacrificial Session), because they are carried on
continuously and are not to be finished on any one day. For this reason
they are called ‘*sattra*,’ specially as they have to be carried on
every day. The term ‘*brahma*’ is synonymous with ‘*Brāhmaṇas*;’ the
meaning being that this is a sacrifical session for Brāhmaṇas. From the
use of this term ‘*brahma*’ here, it follows that all that has been said
before this regarding the means of living, pertains to ‘*Brāhmaṇas*;’
those pertaining to the *Kṣatriya* and others will be described on
various occasions.

*Question*—“How can any living be possible by *pickings* and *gleanings*
alone? since it is only during the autumn and the summer that it is
possible for ears of corns to fall either in fields or in harvest-yards,
it might be said that ‘the man would earn summer-grains from the
summer-harvests, and the autumnal grains from the autumnal harvests.’
But in this way the man would have to collect grains lasting for six
months; and he could never be ‘one who does not possess enough for the
morrow.’ It might be argued that—‘it would be possible for the man to
pick and glean grains that may have fallen here and there (even apart
from harvesting).’ This is true; but the grain collected in this fashion
could never suffice for feeding.—‘When the man is picking and gleaning,
just as he will have collected enough, he will eat; it being impossible
for him to make a collection for five or more days. In the Mahābhārata,
the person who eats at the end of a fortnight has been called ‘one who
lives by pickings and gleanings which means that, under such
circumstances, the Householder has become the Hermit.’—But even so, this
would be incompatible with the character of ‘one who does not possess
enough for the morrow;’ as, under the circumstances mentioned, the man
would be ‘one who lives upon whatever he obtains,’ and *not*‘ one who
does not possess enough for the morrow.’ That man is called ‘one who
does not possess enough for the morrow,’ who earns everyday just enough
for the day, and spends it all on the same day, and does not keep
anything for the next day. If the daily ‘picking and gleaning’ does not
suffice for his daily feeding, how could he be ‘one who does not possess
enough for the morrow?’ How could such a person live and maintain his
wife and children?”

It is in view of these difficulties that some people offer another
explanation of the Text beginning with the words ‘*another lives by
three*’:—‘*By three*’—*i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices, by teaching
and by receiving gifts.—‘*By two*’—*i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices
and by teaching; the ‘receiving of gifts’ being precluded in view of
what is said (in 10.109) regarding ‘the receiving of gifts being
demeaning.’—‘*Brahma* - *sattra*’ is *teaching*; and this would be
enough for a living. The person described (in 4.10) as ‘one who lives by
picking and gleaning, etc.,’ must be different from the four described
in the present text.

On this point, we offer the following explanation:—‘*The person living
by picking*’ is one who obtains from several persons—taking ten or
twelve barley grains from each—just enough to serve for the day; while
one who obtains from each person enough for the day is called ‘one
living by gleanings.’ In another *Smṛti* text, this means of living has
been called ‘*Yāyāvara*.’ in view of this, such livelihood may pertain
to all time. Nor would there be any incompatibility between the
performance of the *Vaiśvadeva* and other rites and the maintaining of
wife and children; as for purposes of the former, a very small quantity
would be taken out of the alms obtained.—(9)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ṣaṭkarma*’—Medhātithi is again misrepresented by Buhler. (See
*Translation*); the ‘six’ described by him are (1) ‘*uñcha*,’ (2)
‘*śila*,’ (3) ‘*ayācitalābha*,’ (4) ‘*yācitalābha*,’ (5) ‘*kṛṣi*’ and
(6) ‘*vāṇijya*’; and he adds that ‘Teaching, sacrificing for others and
receiving gifts’ are included under ‘*yācita-ayācitalābha*’—they are
those mentioned in verses 5 and 6, according to Govindarāja, which
agrees with Medhātithi;—those mentioned in 5 and 6, excepting ‘service’
and substituting in its place ‘money-lending,’ according to Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda;—according to Nārāyaṇa, those mentioned in verses 5 and 6,
and also those enumerated in 1.88;—those mentioned in 1. 88, according
to Nandana, which explanation Medhātithi notes and rejects.

‘*Tribhiḥ*’—Here also Buhler misrepresents Medhātithi; Medhātithi does
not restrict ‘three’ to the ‘first three mentioned in verses 5-6’; what
he clearly says is ‘any three out of those mentioned excepting
agriculture and trade’;—‘teaching, sacrificing and accepting gifts’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nandana);—‘teaching, sacrificing
and accepting gifts, as also the first three mentioned in verses 5-6’
(Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Dvābhyām*’—Here also what Medhātithi says is—*any* *two* out of the
three just recommended, excepting *gifts received for asking*—and not
‘gleaning and accepting voluntary gifts’ as stated by
Buhler;—‘sacrificing and teaching’ (Govindarāja Kullūka, Rāghavānanda
and Nandana);—‘gleaning ears and single grains’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Brahmasattra*’—‘Any one of the two, gleaning ears and gleaning single
grains’ (Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa);—‘teaching’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka,
Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 169), which adds the following
notes:—‘*ṣaṭkarma*’ stands for the six occupations of sacrificing for
others, offering sacrifices and the rest, that have been recommended for
the Brāhmaṇa; and these are referred to for the purpose of prescribing
the three occupations of receiving gifts and the
rest;—‘*tribhiranyaḥ*’—*i*. *e*., for the ‘*kumbhīdhānya*’ also the
three occupations are enjoined;—‘*dvābhyām ekaḥ*’,—this permits
sacrificing and teaching for the *Tryahaihika*,—the receiving of gifts
being forbidden, as they may come from evil persons;—the fourth,
‘*Aśvastana*’ should live by ‘*Brahmasattra*’, *i. e*., teaching alone.
Thus it follows that the ‘*Kusūladhānya*’ and the rest are meant for the
Brāhmaṇa only; as the receiving of gifts and the rest are not possible
for any other caste.

*Mitākṣarā* (on 1.128) quotes the verse in support of the view that the
first refers to ‘sacrificing, teaching, receiving gifts, agriculture,
trade and cattle-tending,’—the second to ‘sacrificing, teaching and
receiving gifts,’—the third to ‘sacrificing and teaching’ and the fourth
to ‘teaching’ only.

The verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 216), which provides an
explanation more in keeping with Medhātithi’s:—The *Kusūladhyāna* has
six occupations,—viz. *uñcha*, *śila, ayācita, yācita, kṛṣi* and
*vāṇijya*;—the other, ‘*Kumbhīdhānya*’ lives by three—*i.e*., *uñcha,
śila* and *ayācita*;—the ‘*Tryahaihika*’ by two—*i.e., uñcha* and
*śila*;—and ‘*Aśvastanika*’ by the ‘*Brahmasattra*’ *i.e*., by the u *ñ*
cha alone, which leads him to the ‘regions of Brahman, and as such is
equal to the *Sattra sacrifice*.’

The verse is quoted also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II. p. 247), which
explains the ‘six occupations’ to be ‘sacrificing, teaching, receiving
gifts, agriculture, trade and cattle-tending;—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 131), which explains the meaning as follows:—Some people live by the
six means—officiating at sacrifices, teaching, receiving gifts,
agriculture, trade and cattle-tending;—others by three only *viz*.,
receiving gifts, teaching and officiating at sacrifices; others by two
only *i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices and teaching; and others again
by one only, teaching; among these each succeeding one is superior to
the preceeding ones.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.244.4).—\[Practically the same as Manu—‘*Ṣaṭkarmā
vartayatyeko tribhiranyaḥ pravartate dvābhyamekaścaturthastu
brahmasattre vyavasthitaḥ*.’\]
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

009	One of these follows six occupations, another subsists by three, one by two, but the fourth lives by the Brahmasattra.
</details>
