+++
title = "025 अग्निहोत्रञ् च"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall always offer the Agnihotra, either at the beginning, or, at the end, of day and night, as also the “Darśa” and the “Paurṇamāsa” at the end of each half-month.—(25).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अग्निहोत्रादयः शब्दाः श्रुतौ गृह्यस्मृतिषु च कर्मविशेषवचनतया प्रसिद्धाः । सेतिकर्तव्यताकाः तत्र विहिताः । तेषाम् अयम् अनुवादो न त्व् अत्रापूर्वविधिः, रूपवचनात् । केवलं होमविषया कर्तव्यता श्रुता, न द्रव्यं न देवता । अग्निहोत्रादि नामधेयं च विशेषाकाङ्क्ष्यम् । अतः शास्त्रान्तरावगतविशेषवचनतैव प्रतीयते । 

- <u>यद्य्</u> एवं तत एव कर्तव्यतावगमाद् अनर्थकम् इदम् ।

- <u>वेदसंन्यासिकायां</u> प्रकृतोपासनासंवादनार्थम् । यथैव "वाच्य् एके जुह्वति प्राणम्" (म्ध् ४.२३) ज्ञानेनैवेति च पञ्चमहायज्ञाः संपाद्यन्ते । तद्वद् एतद् अपीति । कश् चायम् उपालम्भः "किम् अर्थं पुनर्वचनम्" इति, सर्वश्रुतीनां स्मृतीनाम् च यद् एकदेशे ऽभिहितं तस्यैवान्यत्र पुनर्वचनस्य चोद्यापत्तेः । उक्तश् च सामान्यतः परिहारः प्रतिपत्तृभेदान्[^७२] न पौनरुक्त्यम् इति । यथा प्रतिपत्तृभेदाद्[^७३] इन्द्रियभेदो, नैकेन चक्षुषा सर्वे द्रष्टुं शक्नुवन्ति बहूनीन्द्रियाणि प्रयोजनवन्ति, एवं शाखाभेदः स्मृतिभेदश् च ।


[^७३]:
     M G: pratipattibhedād


[^७२]:
     M G: pratipattibhedād

- <u>अथोच्यते</u>- कस्माद् रुपावचनम्[^७४] इति ।


[^७४]:
     M G: rupād vacanam

- <u>एषो ऽपि</u> न दोषः । प्रतिशाखम् इतिकर्तव्यताया भेदः, कस्याभिधानं क्रियताम् । सर्वाभिधाने गौरवम् । एकतराभिधाने अन्यतरपरित्यागः । 

- <u>तद् अपि</u> चोद्यम् एव । 

- <u>उक्तं</u> चानुवादो ऽयं न विधिः । विधौ हि चोद्यम् एतत् स्यात् । अन्यत्र विहितं किम् अर्थं पुनर् विधानम् इति ।

- **आद्यन्ते द्युनिशोः** । नात्र यथासंख्यम्, किं तर्हि दिव आदौ निशायाश् चादौ, एवं दिवो ऽन्ते निशायाश् चान्त इति । सायंप्रातः कालाव् एतेन परिगृह्येते । तत्रोदितहोमिनाम् अहरादौ अनुदितहोमिनां निशान्ते । द्युशब्दो[^७५] दिवसपर्यायः । **सदा** । यावज्जीवं सायंप्रातर् होमः कर्तव्यः । **दर्शेन** यजेतेत्य् अत्राध्याहर्तव्यम् ।[^७६] न हि तत्रोत्पत्तौ जुहुयाद् इत्य् अस्ति, किं तर्हि दर्शेन यजेतेति । तदनुवादश् चायम् । अत एवाध्याहारः क्रियते । अत एव अविशेषश्रवणे ऽपि **अर्धमासान्त** इति कृष्णपक्षान्ते दर्शः शुक्लान्ते पौर्णमासः । तथा च स्रुतिः- "दर्शे च दर्शेन यजेत पूर्णमास्यां पूर्णमासेन यजेत" इति ॥ ४.२५ ॥


[^७६]:
     M G add: darśena yajet


[^७५]:
     M G 1st ed.: dviśabdo
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The terms ‘*agnihotra*’ and the rest are found used in the Veda and in
the Gṛhyasūtra texts, in the sense of particular rites; and these rites,
along with their procedure, are prescribed in these texts. And it is to
these rites that the present verse makes a *reference*; it does not
contain the original injunction of the rites; specially, as it speaks of
their *form* only; *i.e*, all that the present verse mentions is the
necessity of performing the act of *offering* only,—and it does not
mention either the material to be offered, or the deity to whom it is to
be offered. And yet the names ‘*Agnihotra*’ and the rest, stand in need
of the mention of detailed particulars; hence it follows that what is
implied is that the detailed particulars of these rites are to be learnt
from other treatises.

“If that be so, then, since the necessity of performing the rites also
could be learnt from those same treatises, there is no use for the
present text at all.”

The use of the present text lies in adjusting the necessity of
performing these acts, in the case of persons who have renounced Vedic
rituals, with the form of worship laid down in the present context; the
sense being that just as, according to what has been said regarding some
people offering ‘the life-breath into speech,’ and so forth, the Five
Great Sacrifices are performed by such men, by means of *Knowledge*
alone,—so are the sacrificial rites mentioned in the present verse also.
Then again, what sort of objection is this that you urge, when you
ask—‘Why should there he a repeated mention?’ As a matter of fact, in
the case of the Vedic and Smṛti texts, it is found that what is said in
one part of it is said again in another part; and all this would be open
to objection (according to you). Lastly, we have already provided the
general answer to such objections;—*viz*., that since the persons meant
to be enlightened are many, the texts cannot be regarded as needless
repetitions at all. Just as, by reason of the perceiv-ers being many,
there are many organs of perception, and all men cannot see with one eye
only, and there is need of several such organs,—so also is the case with
the diverse Vedic and Smṛti texts.

The question might be raised—“Why should the mere name of the rites be
mentioned?”

There is nothing objectionable in this also. Since the procedures as
laid down in the several Vedic texts are divergent, which particular
procedure could the verse mention? If it were to mention all, there
would be prolexity; and if it were to mention any *one* only, this would
involve the abandoning of the others.

“Even so, the omission is open to objection.”

But we have already pointed out that the present verse contains only a
*reference*, and not an *Injunction*. It is only an Injunction, against
which the objection can be urged that—‘the act being already enjoined
elsewhere, why should it be enjoined again?’

‘*At the beginning and end of dag and night*;’—this is not meant to be
construed respectively. What is meant is—‘at the beginning of day and
beginning of night,’ and ‘at the end of day and end of night;’ and by
this, *morning and evening* are meant. For those who follow the practice
of making the offerings *after sunrise*, the offering shall be made ‘at
the beginning of day;’ while for those who follow the practice of making
the offerings *before sunrise*, it shall be made ‘at the end of night.’

The term ‘*dyu*’ here is synonymous with ‘*Divasa*,’ ‘day.’

‘*Always*,’—*i.e*., throughout one’s life, one should offer these
morning and evening libations.

In connection with ‘*darśena*,’ it is necessary to supply the root
‘*yajeta*’; as the original injunction of the *Darśa-sacrifice* does not
contain the verb, ‘*juhuyāt*,’—the injunction being in the form
‘*darśena yajeta*;’ and the prfesent verse makes only a reiterative
reference to what is prescribed in that injunction; and thus (it being
impossible to construe ‘*darśena*’ with the verb ‘*juhuyāt*’ in the
verse) it becomes necessary to supply the verb ‘*yajeta*.’ For this same
reason, though the text does not make any specification, the phrase,
‘*at the end of half-month*’ should be understood to mean that the
*Darśa* is to be performed at the end of the darker fortnight, and the
*Paurṇamāsa* (*Pūrṇamāsa*) at the end of the brighter fortnight. Says
the *Śruti*—‘One should perform the *Darśa* sacrifice on the Moonless
Day and the *Paurṇamāsa* on the Full Moon Day.’—(25)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 217), which makes the following
observations:—The ‘ends of night and day’ being laid down as the times
fit for the making of the two *Agnihotra* offerings,—the points of time
really meant are also those immediately preceding and following the said
‘ends’; it is on this understanding that the evening-offering is
commenced in the *afternoon* and finished after the evening; and for
those who adopt the alternative of making the offering ‘after sunrise,’
it is done after the sun has actually risen, (which would naturally be
*after* the end of the night). Similarly as the exact point of time
denoted by the term ‘*Darśa*’ would be too minute for any act, it stands
for such length of time as may be necessary for the entire offering.
Then follows a long disquisition regarding ‘*Paurṇamāsa*’ and
‘*Amāvasyā*’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (1.124).—‘That Brāhmaṇa who may have grains enough for
three years shall drink *Soma*; and he who has enough for the year shall
perform the rites previous to the Soma.’

*Viṣṇu* (59. 2-4).—‘The Agnihotra in the morning and in the
evening;—oblations should be poured to the gods;—one shall offer
sacrifices on the moonless and full-moon days, by reason of the
proximity and remoteness of the moon and the sun.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

025	A Brahmana shall always offer the Agnihotra at the beginning or at the end of the day and of the night, and the Darsa and Paurnamasa (Ishtis) at the end of each half-month,
</details>
