+++
title = "026 सस्यान्ते नवसस्येष्ट्या"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At the end of the grains, the Brāhmaṇa shall perform the “New-Harvest sacrifice;” at the end of the seasons, the “Adhvara-sacrifices;” at the end of the solstices the “Animal-sacrifice;” and at the end of the year the “Soma-sacrifices.”—(26)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^७७]:
     M: ayanasyādau; G 1st ed.: ayanādau te; G 2nd ed: ayanānte te

**सस्य**शब्दो व्रीह्यादिधान्यवचनः । तस्य्**आन्तः** क्षयः । पूर्वसस्येषु क्षीणेषु **नवसस्येष्ट्या** यजेत, आग्रयणेनेत्य् अर्थः । 

- न चात्र पूर्वसस्यक्षय आग्रयणनिमित्तम्, नापि नवसस्यागमः, किं तर्हि अकृताग्रयणस्य नवान्नाशनं प्रतिषिद्धम् । येनाह- "नानिष्ट्वा । । । नवान्नम् अद्यात्" (म्ध् ४.२७) इति । अतो नवसस्यभक्षणम् आग्रयणेनेत्य् अर्थः । तेन यजेतेति व्याचक्षते । 

- अस्मिंस् तु पक्षे पूर्वसस्याभावात् नवसस्यस्य भावाद् अन्यतो वा, असत्यां चाशिशिक्षायां न नियमतया आग्रयणं प्राप्नोति । अथेदं **सस्यान्त** इति नवोत्पत्त्युपलक्षणम्, तदानिष्ट्वा भकषं प्राप्नोति ।

- तस्माद् द्वे एते वाक्ये । "**नानिष्ट्वाश्नीयात्**" इत्य् एकम्, "**सस्यान्ते**" इति द्वितीयम् । **सस्यान्त**ग्रहणेन च सस्योत्पत्तिर् एवाभिप्रेता, नियतत्वात् तस्या निमित्तस्योपपत्तिः । क्षयस् त्व् अनियतः, धनिनां हि त्रैवार्षिकान्य् अपि धान्यान्य् अत्र प्रवर्तन्ते । अत एव सूत्रकारः "सस्यं नाश्नीयाद् अग्निहोत्रम् अहुत्वा" इति; तथा "यदा वर्षस्य तृप्तः स्याद् अथाग्रयणेन यजेत" इति । तथेदम् अपरम् "शरदि नवान्नम्" इति कालविशेषविधायकम् । तत्र यस्य पूर्वसस्यक्षयो नास्ति, स शरदम् आद्रियते, इतरस् तु न । एवम् उभयोर् अर्थवत्ता च भवति । इतरथा एवम् एवावक्ष्यत- "नवसस्योत्पत्तौ नवसस्येष्ट्या यजेत" इति । यस् त्व् आह "नानिष्ट्वा नवसस्येष्ट्या न चान्नम् अश्नीयात्" इति, तेन उत्पन्नेष्व् अपि नवसस्येषु विद्यमानस्य अस्ति शरत्प्रतिपालनम् । नवसस्योत्पत्तिनिमित्तत्वाच् च असत्याम् अपि नवान्नाशनेच्छायां नियमतः आग्रयणम् ।

- **ऋत्वन्ते** । "ऋतुः संवत्सरः" इतिदर्शनेन चातुर्मास्यानाम् एतत् करणम् उच्यते । **अध्वर**शब्देन तान्य् एवाभिप्रेतानि ।

- अयनयोर् आदी **अयनान्ते** । ते च द्वे अयने दक्षिणम् उत्तरं च । तत्र पशुयागः कर्तव्यो द्विः संवत्सरस्य । सूत्रकारस् त्व् आह "षाण्मास्यः सांवत्सरो वा" इति ।

- **समान्ते** । समाशब्दः संवत्सरपर्यायस् तस्य चान्तः समाप्तिः शिशिरे । न च तत्रेदं सौमिकयागविधानम्, किं तर्हि गते तस्मिन् वसन्त आगते । तथा च श्रुतिः "वसन्ते वसन्ते ज्योतिषा यजेत" (आप्श् १०.२.५) इति । एतावन्ति नित्यानि कर्माणि । तानि यथा कथंचिद् वेदसंन्यासिकेनापि संपाद्यानीति सर्वस्य तात्पर्यम् ॥ ४.२६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*sasya*,’ ‘*grains*,’ stands for the *Vrīhi* and other
grains;—‘*end*’ means *exhaustion*. The meaning is that when the
previous supply of grains has become exhausted, he shall perform the
‘New-Harvest Sacrifice,’ *i.e*., the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice.

This does not mean that either the exhaustion of the previous supply of
grain, or the coming in of the new harvest, is the reason or occasion
for the performance of the *Āgrayaṇeṣṭi*; what is meant is that the
eating of new grain is prohibited, until one has performed the
*Āgrayaṇeṣṭi*. This is what has been said in the following text—‘Without
having offered the sacrifice, one should not eat new grain.’ On these
grounds, some people explain the verse to mean that ‘since one cannot
eat new grains without having performed the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice, one
shall perform this sacrifice.’

But, according to this explanation, it would mean that—if there has been
no previous grain-supply, or, if there is no fresh grain-supply, or, if
one has no desire to eat new grains, it would not he necessary to
perform the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice. If the ‘end of previous supply’ be
taken to be indicative of the coming in of the new supply \[and there
were nothing to prohibit the eating of new grains before performing the
sacrifice\], then it becomes possible to eat the new grain without
having performed the sacrifice.

For these reasons, we conclude that here we have two declarations—(*a*)
‘he shall not eat without having performed the sacrifice’ (next verse)
and (*b*) ‘at the end of the grains, &c.’ (present verse). The ‘end of
grains’ is meant to stand for the coining of the new grain; since the
*coming in* is certain, and as such can serve as the occasion for the
sacrifice. The ‘end’ or ‘exhaustion’ (of the former supply), on the
other hand, is uncertain; since, in the case of rich men, there are
supplies that may last for three years. It is for these reasons that the
author of the *Sūtra* has declared—

‘Without having performed the *Agnihotra*, one shall not eat out of the
harvest,’ and ‘When one is satisfied for the year, one shall perform the
Āgrayaṇa,’—and, further, ‘The new-grain sacrifice is to be doue in the
autumn this last laying down the time for the sacrifice. So that the
man, for whom there is no ‘end of the former supply,’ will observe the
rule regarding autumn being the time for the sacrifice; which will not
be done by another person (for whom there is ‘end of former supply’). In
this way, both the declarations are found to have their use. If this
were not the meaning, then the author would have said simply—‘On the
coming of the new harvest, he shall perforin the New-Harvest Sacrifice.’
Since, however, the author says—‘without having performed the
New-Harvest Sacrifice, one shall not eat of the new grains,’ it follows
that even when the new harvest has come iu, if the man happen to have
old corn left, he may wait-till the autumn (for the performance of the
sacrifice); and, since the coming in of the new harvest forms the
occasion for the sacrifice, the performance of the *Āgrayaṇa* is
obligatory, even when the man has no desire to eat new grains.

‘*At the end of the seasons*’—According to the theory that ‘the *season*
constitutes the year,’ what this portion of the text lays down is the
performance of the *Cāturmāsya* sacrifices; in fact, it is these
sacrifices that are referred to by the term ‘*adhvara*,’

‘*End of the solstices*’ means ‘beginning of the two solstices’;—the two
solstices being the ‘northern’ and the ‘southern.’ At these, one shall
perform the ‘Animal-Sacrifice,’ twice during the year. The author of the
Sutra has said—‘This sacrifice is either six monthly or yearly.’

‘*At the end of the year*.’—The term ‘*samā*’ is synonymous with ‘year;’
and the ‘end’ of this is the *śiśira*, the later winter season. The
present verse does not mean that the Soma-sacrifice shall be performed
during the winter; what is meant is that—‘when the winter has passed and
the spring has arrived, the Soma-sacrifice shall be performed.’ Says the
*Śruti*—‘At each spring-season, one shall perform the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
sacrifice.’

What the whole text means is that these constitute the obligatory rites,
and, as such, shall be performed, somehow or the other, by even those
who have renounced Vedic rituals.—(26).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 217).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (59.5-9).—‘At each solstice, with the Paśuyāga;—during the
autumn and the summer, with the Āgrayaṇa sacrifice;—also on the ripening
of the Vrīhi and the Yava;—he who possesses grains more than what would
be needed for three years,—each year, with Soma-sacrifice.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.41).—‘The Brāhmaṇa must necessarily lay the Fires;—he
shall perform the sacrifices of Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa, Āgrayaṇeṣṭi,
Cāturmāsya, Paśu and Soma.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.126).—‘Each year, the Soma,—at each solstice the
Paśu,—and the Āgrayaṇeṣṭi and the Cāturmāsya also shall be performed.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	When the old grain has been consumed the (Agrayana) Ishti with new grain, at the end of the (three) seasons the (Katurmasya-) sacrifices, at the solstices an animal (sacrifice), at the end of the year Soma-offerings.
</details>
