+++
title = "027 नाऽनिष्ट्वा नवसस्येष्ट्या"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Without having performed the New-Harvest sacrifice, and the animal Sacrifice, the Brāhmaṇa, who has set up the fire, shall not eat new grain or meat,—if he desires to live a long life.—(27)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अग्निमान्** आहिताग्निर् अत्राभिप्रेतः, व्रताधिकारात् । तस्य होमस्य याजुर्वेदिकं व्रतम् । **नानिष्ट्वा पशुना** मांसं समश्नीयान् नाग्रयणेन नवान्नम् इति । 

- नियमानुपालने फलम् आह । **दीर्घम् आयुर् जिजीविषुः** । आयुःशब्देन प्रबन्धवत्यः प्राणापानवृत्तय उच्यन्ते । द्वितीया च सत्य् अपि जीवतेर् अकर्मकत्वे ऽपि इषिक्रियापेक्षया । सन्नन्तो ऽपि धातुर् इच्छायां वर्तते । अत्रापि[^७८] दर्शने इषेः कर्म प्रकृत्यर्थो न बाह्यम्, इच्छा वेक्ष्यमाणं प्रति गुणभूता, प्रकृतिप्रत्ययौ प्रययार्थं सह ब्रुवत इति सन्नन्ताद् अन्यत्रापि । अस्मिन्न् अपि दर्शने आयुःशब्देन कालो लक्षयिष्यते, दीर्घकालं जीवनम् इच्छन् । तत्र "कालता वावगन्तव्या कर्मसंज्ञा ह्य् अकर्मणाम्" इति कर्मत्वम् । 


[^७८]:
     M G 1st ed.: yady api

- एष चाहिताग्नेः पशुबन्धे नियमः, आग्रयणे ऽपि । गृह्याग्निमतो ऽपि **गृह्यस्मृतिषु** नियमतया आग्रयणं विहितम् । 

- यच् चेदं "शरदि नवन्नम्" इति, तत् व्रीहिश्यामाकयोर्[^७९] न यवानाम् । न च सस्यमात्रेण सस्येष्टियागः, न च माषम् उद्गादिना । यत इदं शास्त्रान्तरसापेक्षम्, न स्वतो विधायकम् इत्य् उक्तम् । शास्त्रान्तरेषु च व्रीहिश्यामाकयवैर् आग्रयणेष्टिर् विहिता । 


[^७९]:
     M G: -śyāmakayor

- किं त्व् अन्यद् अपि सस्यं नाशितव्यम् अकृतायाम् आग्रयणेष्टौ । यद् उक्तम् अविशेषेण "सस्यं नाश्नीयात्" इति । तन्निषेधे ह्य् अभिप्रेते इयद् एवावक्ष्यत्- "आग्रयणं व्रीहिश्यामाकयवानाम्, सस्यं[^८०] नाश्नीयाद् अग्निहोत्रम् अहुत्वा" इति । एवं सूत्रकारेण पठितम्- "आग्रयणं व्रीहिस्यामाकयवानाम्, सस्यं नाश्नीयाद् अग्निहोत्रम् अहुत्वा" इति । अतो ऽयं सस्यशब्दो न प्रतिनियतविषय एव ॥ ४.२७ ॥


[^८०]:
     M G 1st ed.: etaṃ; G 2nd ed. omits: sasyaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*Agnimān*’ must stand here for one who has set up the Fire;
because ‘observances’ form the subject matter of the context; and it is
in connection with the *Agnihotra-homa* that we have ‘observances’ laid
down in the Yajur-veda.

Without having performed the Animal Sacrifice, he shall not eat meat,
nor shall be eat new grain without having performed the New-Harvest
Sacrifice.

The text next describes the reward accruing from the observing of this
rule—‘*if he desires to live a long life*.’ The term, ‘*āyu*,’ ‘life,’
denotes the function of the out-and-in-breathings operating
continuously. Even though the verb, to live,’ is intransitive, yet we
have the accusative ending, in view of the action of ‘desiring,’—this
act of *desiring* being expressed by the verb (‘to live) as ending in
the desiderative affix ‘*san*.’ Though, as a matter of fact, the object
of the act of ‘desiring’ is what is denoted by the root to which the
desiderative is affixed (*i.e*., *living*), and not anything outside the
desiderative term itself,—and the *desire* is subordinate to *what is
desired*,—yet there need be nothing incongruous in the suggested
construction, in view of the dictum that ‘the basic term and the affix
jointly denote what is expressed by the affix’; so that the accusative
ending may be attributed to what is expressed by the desiderative word
as a whole. According to this view also, the term ‘*āyti*’ ‘life,’ would
he indicative of a period of *time*, the meaning being ‘if he desires a
life lasting for a long time.’ So that the accusative would he due to
the dictum that ‘in the case of intransitive verbs, the time-period may
be regarded as an object.’

This rule, relating to the man with the Fire performing the Animal
Sacrifice, applies to the case of the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice also. Because
the Gṛhya texts have prescribed the *Āgrayaṇa* as an obligatory rite for
one who has only the domestic fire.

As for the rule that ‘the New-Harvest Sacrifice is to be performed in
the autumn,’ this refers to the *Vrīhi* and the *Śyāmāka* grains, not to
the *Yava*. Nor is it necessary to perform the Harvest-Sacrifice at each
and every harvest; nor is it performed with such grains as the *Māṣa*,
the *Mudga*, and the like. That all this is so follows from the fact
that the present text is dependent upon other scriptural injunctions,
and it is not itself a self-sufficient injunction, as we have already
explained. And in other scriptural injunctions it has been laid down
that the *Āgrayaṇeṣṭi* is to be performed with the *Vrīhi*, the
*Śyāmāka* and the *Yam*.

Though this is so, yet other. grains also should not be eaten, until the
*Āgrayaṇeṣṭi* has been performed; since it has been stated in general
terms that ‘he shall eat *no new grains* and if the author had meant to
prohibit the eating of only those grains with which the *Āgrayaṇeṣṭi* is
performed, then he should have said—‘He shall not eat the *Vrīhi*, the
*Śyāmāka* and the *Yava*, until he has made the offering;’ while what
the author of the *Sūtra* has said is—‘The Āgrayaṇa is to be performed
with the *Vrīhi*, the *Śyāmāka* and the *Vara*; *one shall eat no new
grains* until one has made the offering;’ so that the term ‘*grain*’
cannot stand for any particular grains only.—(27).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gobhila-Smṛti* (3.94).—‘The man who eats new grains without having
offered it in sacrifice, for him the expiation consists in making the
Vaiśvānara offering.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

027	A Brahmana, who keeps sacred fires, shall, if he desires to live long, not eat new grain or meat, without having offered the (Agrayana) Ishti with new grain and an animal-(sacrifice).
</details>
