+++
title = "033 राजतो धनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Suffering from hunger, the accomplished student should seek for wealth from the king, or from one at whose sacrificial rites he officiates, or from his pupil; and not from others; such is the rule.—(33)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**राज**ग्रहणम् आढ्यवर्णोपलक्षणार्थम् । तथा च वक्ष्यति- "सीदद्भिः कुप्यम् इच्छद्भिर् धनं वा पृथिवीपतिः । याच्यः स्यात्" इति (म्ध् १०.११३) । तेन राजशब्दः क्षत्रियजातौ मुख्यः, तथापि शास्त्रान्तरपर्यालोचनया[^८९] जनपदेश्वरवचन इति गम्यते । जनपदेश्वरा हि बहुधना भवन्ति । तेनैतद् उक्तं भवति- ये ऽत्यन्तसंपन्ना गोऽजाविधनदान्यैस् तेभ्यः प्रतिग्रहीतव्यम् । तथा सति "अद्रोहेण" (म्ध् ४.२) इत्य् एतद् आदृतं[^९०] भवति । आढ्या हि ददतो नातीव पीड्यन्ते । स्वपधनेभ्यस् तु परिगृह्णतो दोषः स्यात् । मुख्यार्थवृत्तौ च राजशब्दे ब्राह्मणादिभ्यः प्रतिग्रहः प्रतिषिध्यते । तत्र सर्वस्मृतिविरोधः स्यात् । स्मृत्यन्तरे हि पठ्यते- "आददीत प्रशस्तद्विजातिभ्यः शुश्रूषोश् च शूद्राद् अपक्वान्नम्" इति । प्रतिषेधे ऽपि "न राज्ञः प्रतिगृह्णीयात्" (म्ध् ४.८४) इति राजशब्दो जनपदेश्वरवचन एव । किं च न क्षत्रियस्य तत्र प्रतिषेधः "अराजन्यप्रसूतितः" (म्ध् ४.८४) इति वचनात् । अत एव न क्षत्रियजातीयात् तत्र तन्निषेधः, तथा सति "अराजन्यप्रसूतितः" इति न वक्तव्यं स्यात् । न ह्य् अराजन्यप्रसूतितः[^९१] क्षत्रिया भवन्ति । तेनेयम् अत्र व्यवस्था- क्षत्रियाद् राज्ञो यथाशास्त्रवर्तिनः प्रतिग्रहः कर्तव्यः, अन्यस्मात् पुनर् न[^९२] । 


[^९२]:
     M G: punar narakaikaviṃśatyā yogaḥ 


[^९१]:
     DK (5: 1170) suggests: -prasūtitayaḥ


[^९०]:
     M G 1st ed.: āhṛtaṃ


[^८९]:
     M G J: śāstrāntaparyālocanayā (I follow DK 5: 1170)

- **याज्यान्तेवासिनोः** । धनापेक्षा षष्ठी । तसन्तो वा पठितव्यः । क्रियानिमित्तत्वाद् एतयोः शब्दयोर् याजनाध्यापनाभ्यां जीवेद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुः- अन्येषाम् उपपातकप्राप्तिश् चौर्यादीनां चोपायानां निषिद्धत्वात्, ईश्वरम् आराध्य जीवेत् प्रीतिदायेन स्वस्तिवाचनकेन वा । न चायं सेवकः । सा वृत्तिर् निषिद्धा । एवं कृतोपकाराद् अयाजयन्न् अपि याज्याद् आददीत । निवृत्ते[^९३] ऽपि संबन्धे कृत्यो वर्तत इति ।


[^९३]:
     M G 1st ed.: vṛtte

- **संसीदन्न्** इति । पित्रादिधने सति न कर्तव्यम् । तद् उक्तम् "न कल्पमानेष्व् अर्थेषु" (म्ध् ४.१५) । तस्यैवायम् अनुवादः । न चायम् आपद्धर्मः । न ह्य् अवसाद आपत्, किं तर्हि, अर्जितधनाभावः । आपत् तु विहितोपायाभावो धनक्षयश् च । सत्य् अपि धान्यधनबहुत्वे[^९४] अन्नपरिक्षये दुर्भिक्षादाव् आतिथ्यसंनिहितान्नता क्षुत्पीडितस्य आपत्, अक्षुधितस्यापि धनाभावाद् अवसाद इत्य् एष एतयोर् विशेषः । 


[^९४]:
     M G 1st ed.: dhānyadhanavatve; DK (5: 1170) suggests omitting: dhānya

- **न त्व् अन्यतः** स्वल्पधनान्नानुपकार्यात् गृह्णीयात् ॥ ४.३३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*king*’ here stands for all wealthy castes; as the author is
going to declare later on (10-113)—‘The king should be begged by persons
suffering from want and seeking for wealth and metals.’ Thus the term
‘*rājan*,’ ‘*king*,’ in its primary denotation signifies the *Kṣatriya*
caste; but on the strength of what we see in other treatises, we take it
to mean here the ‘king of men,’ specially, as kings of men are wealthy.
Thus, what the text means is that—‘gifts’ should be received from such
persons as are extremely rich in the possession of cows and bulls, goat
and sheep, cash and grains. In doing this, the man shall he also
observing the rule that ‘he should live without causing pain to any
one;’ as such people do not feel any pain in making gifts; while if one
were to beg from men with small wealth, it would be open to objection.

If the term ‘*rājan*’ were taken in its primary sense of the *Kṣatriya
caste*, the receiving of gifts from *Brāhmaṇas* and others would become
forbidden; and this would be against the teaching of all *Smṛtis*. In
another *Smṛti*, we read—‘One shall receive gifts from commended
twice-born people, and uncooked food also from a *Śūdra* who is
submissive,’ In prohibitions also, we find the term ‘*rājan*’ used in
the sense of ‘king of men;’ *e,g*., in such passages as—‘One shall not
accept gifts from the Rājā,’ where the prohibition cannot apply to the
*Kṣatriya caste*, since the text subsequently adds—^(‘)or from one not
born of *Kṣatriya* parents’ (4-84). It is for this reason that this
latter verse cannot be taken as forbidding the acceptance of gifts from
the Kṣatriya, because, if that were meant, the text could not add ‘from
one not born of Kṣatriya parents;’ for those ‘not born of Kṣatriya
parents’ can never be ‘Kṣatriyas,’ For these reasons, the conclusion on
this point is as follows:—‘gifts shall be accepted from such Kṣatriya
kings as behave according to the scriptures, and not from others,’

‘*From one at whose sacrificial rites he officiates*, *or from his
pupil*.’— The Genitive ending is used in reference to the ‘wealth.’ Or,
we may read the phrase as ending with the ‘Tasi
affix’—*yājyāntevāsitaḥ*.’ Since both these names are based upon the
doing of certain acts, the meaning is that—‘he shall live by the
occupations of Teaching and Officiating at Sacrifices.’

Others explain as follows:—The receiving of gifts from others would
constitute a minor sin, and other means of acquiring wealth, such as
theft and the like, are distinctly forbidden. The upshot is that he
shall worship God and live upon gifts made through love, and also by
pronouncing ‘*svasti*’ (at sacrificial performances); but in no case
shall he do service; as that means of livelihood has been already
forbidden. Thus he may accept gifts from such of his sacrificial clients
as have received benefit at his hands, even though he may not be
officiating at their sacrifices at the time; for even though the actual
relationship (of priest and client) may have ceased, their duty towards
each other remains.

‘*Suffering*.’—This means that gifts shall not be sought, if the man has
inherited some property; as it has been declared (in verse 15 above)
that—‘nor when wealth is already there.’

What is said here is not something to be done in abnormal times of
distress; as mere ‘suffering’ does not constitute ‘distress;’ all that
it means is ‘absence of earned wealth;’ and it would be a case of
‘distress,’ only if the adopting of any of the sanctioned means of
living were impossible, or if all one’s property were destroyed. Even
though he may be possessed of much cash and grains, his grain-supply may
become exhausted in times of famine; and, in such cases, if
entertainment as a guest would be impossible, and the man would be
suffering from hunger, this would constitute ‘distress;’ while, if the
man were not pining from hunger, this would be simple ‘suffering.’ Such
is the difference between the two (*distress* and *suffering*).

‘*Not from others*.’—That is, he shall receive no gifts from persons
with little wealth, or from one who receives no benefit from the person
(begging).—(33)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 33), which adds that where
the text says ‘not from others’, what it means is that ‘in the event of
those named here being available, one should not seek for it from
others’;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 402), which explains ‘*rājan*’
as standing for ‘the just king of the Kṣatriya caste’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (9.6 3, 64).—‘For the sake of his own maintenance and welfare
he shall approach none except those who may he dutiful towards gods and
elders.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.2),—‘He shall beg from any one except the king and his
own pupils.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.130).—‘Suffering from hunger, he may seek for wealth
from the king, from his own pupils and from one at whose sacrifices he
officiates; and he shall avoid the hypocrite, the sceptic, the impostor
and the heron-like.’

*Viṣṇu* (63.1).—‘For the sake of his maintenance and welfare he shall
approach the king.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

033	A Snataka who pines with hunger, may beg wealth of a king, of one for whom he sacrifices, and of a pupil, but not of others; that is a settled rule.
</details>
