+++
title = "036 वैणवीन् धारयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall hold a stick of bamboo, and also a water-pot full of water, the sacred thread, a handful of kuśa-grass and a pair of bright golden ear-rings.—(36).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यज्ञोपवीतकुण्डलयोर् धारणं शरीरसंयोगः । यस्य[^९६] च यस्मिन्न् अङ्गे समुचितः संनिवेशः स तत्रैव विनियोजनीयः । यथा कुण्डलं कर्णयोर् उपवीतं काय इति, कर्णाभरणस्य कुण्डालाख्यत्वात् । कण्ठसक्तस्य च सूत्रस्य दक्षिणबाहूद्धारणेनोपवीतत्वात् । 


[^९६]:
     M G: asya

- दृष्टप्रयोजनत्वाच् च यष्ट्यादिना सर्वदाङ्गसङ्गः । तथा हि यष्टिधारणं श्रान्तस्यावलम्बनार्थं संमुखागतघातकगवादिनिवारणार्थं च । 

- उद्धृतोदकेन शौचस्य विहितत्वात्, आधारापेक्षया कमण्डलुर् नियम्यते । स च तुल्यकार्यत्वात् कलशादीन् निवर्तयति, न कुण्डलकटकादीन् । अतश् च पुरीषनिमित्तस्योदकशोध्याशुचित्वापनोदार्थं सोदकत्वं कमण्डलोः । उक्तं च- "मुहूर्तम् अपि शक्तिविषये नाशुचि तिष्ठेत्" (च्ड़्। आप्ध् १.१५.८) इति । "शक्तिविषये" इति- यदि पूर्वगृहीतम् उदकम् उपयुक्तम् अन्यथाप्राप्तम् अशुचित्वनिमित्तं च श्लेष्मनिष्ठीवनाद्युत्पन्नं तत्रोदकालाभाद् अशुचित्वं[^९७] न दोषः । तथापि मूत्रपुरीषविस्रंसने स्नानं वक्ष्यति- "विनाद्भिर् अप्सु वाप्यार्तः[^९८] शारीरं संनिवेश्य[^९९] तु । सचैलो बहिर् आप्लुत्य" इति (म्ध् ११.२०२) । शुचिश् च स्मृत्यन्तरे प्रतिपदम् आम्नातः । एवं ह स्माह भगवान् वसिष्ठः-


[^९९]:
     M G 1st ed.: saṃniṣedhya


[^९८]:
     M G 1st ed.: apsu tarpeta


[^९७]:
     M G: aśucir avasthāne

- अप्सु पाणौ च काष्ठे च कथितः पावकः शुचिः ।

- तस्माद् उदकपाणिभ्यां परिमृज्य कमण्डलुम् ॥

- पर्यग्निकरणं होमं मनुर् आह प्रजापतिः ।

- कृत्वा चावश्यकार्याणि आचामेच् छौचवित्तमः ॥ (वध् १२.१५–१७)

बौधायनेनाप्य् उक्तम्- "अथ कमण्डलुं धार्यम्" इत्य् उपक्रम्य,

- तस्माच् छौचं ततः कृत्वा परिमृज्य कमण्डलुम् । 

- पर्यग्निकरणं ह्य् एतद् यद् वस्तुपरिमार्जनम् ॥

तथा ।

- कमण्डलुं परिहरेत् पूर्वावस्थो ऽप्य् अशौचतः ।

- न चैनं कुत्सयेद् विद्वान् न शङ्केन् न च दूषयेत् ॥

आकारविशेषनिमित्तश् चायं शब्दो न जातिम् आद्रियते । अतो मृन्मयस्य सौवर्णस्य राजतस्य वा एषैव शुद्धिर् न प्रकृतिजातिसंबन्धिनी । मूत्रादिस्पर्शे तु प्रकृतिजातिशुद्धिर् अवधेया । हस्तमार्जनं तूच्छिष्टपुरुषसंस्पर्शाद्यशुचित्वात् । तथा च गौतमः "क्वचिच् छौचर्थं संनिधाय" इत्य् आह । अत इहापि संनिधानम् एवाभिप्रेतम्, न स्वात्मना ग्रहणम् । 

- **वेदो** दर्भमुष्टिस् तस्य च "प्राणोपस्पर्शनं दर्भैः" इत्यादि प्रयोजनम् । अतश् चादृष्टार्थानां सार्वकालिकशरीरसंबन्धः, दृष्टार्थानां तु संनिधिर् नित्यम्, प्रयोजनतस् तु ग्रहणम् इति । **शुभे** दर्शनीये, आकारतः तापछेदकषैश् च सुवर्णशुद्ध्या ॥ ४.३६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘holding’ of the sacred thread and of the ear-rings, would consist
in their being worn on the body; and each of these should be worn on
that part of the body for which it is fitted; for instance, the
ear-rings shall be worn in the ears, and the sacred thread over the
body; the term ‘*kuṇḍala*’ ‘ear-ring,’ being the name of the ornament
for the ear; and the name ‘sacred thread’ being applied to the thread
worn over the neck and passing under the right arm.

The stick and the rest are to be always kept on the body, in view of the
visible purposes served by them. For instance, the stick serves as a
support when the man is tired, and it also serves the purpose of driving
away the bull and other aggressive animals.

Inasmuch as ‘cleaning’ has been laid down as to be done with water taken
out of a reservoir, the present text restricts the vessel to the
‘water-pot’ definitely; and this precludes the jar and other vessels,
which serve the same purpose (of holding water), and not such other
things as the ear-ring, the bracelet, and so forth.

Thus it is that the water-pot has to be kept filled with water, for the
purpose of removing such uncleanliness as may be caused by contamination
during the act of paying the calls of nature, and which is capable of
being removed by water. It has been said that—‘in matters within one’s
power, one should not remain unclean for a single moment.’ The meaning
of the phrase, ‘in matters within one’s power,’ is as follows If the
water held before has been used up, and then there happens to come about
such further uncleanliness as is caused by spitting, and the like, then,
if water be not available, there would be no harm in the man remaining
unclean for sometime (till he can obtain the requisite water); but even
so, in connection with the calls of nature, our author is going to
prescribe bathing under 12. 22, where it is laid down that ‘the man
should dip into water, with all his clothing.’

Precise rules regarding the means of cleaning have been laid down in
another *Smṛti* text. Says the revered *Vaśiṣṭha* (12-15-17)—“For water,
hand and wood, Fire has been declared to be the means of cleaning;
hence, having washed the water-pot with the hands and with water, the
offering that one makes, has been declared by manu Prajāpati to
constitute *Paryagnikaraṇa* (Fire-purfication). The person knowning the
laws of cleanliness should rinse his mouth after having done all
necessary acts.’

Baudhayāna also has said—after having begun with the words, ‘Now the
water-pot is to be held,’—‘Having become clean, and when one washes the
water-pot, this washing of things constitutes *Paryagnikaraṇa*
(Purification by fire); even in his previous condition, the man shall
leave off the water-pot, on account of its being unclean; but the
learned shall not decry it, nor censure it, nor regard it as
objectionable.’

The name ‘*kamaṇḍalu*,’ ‘*water-pot*,’ is based upon the particular
shape, and not upon any particular species or kind, of its material. So
that, whether it be made of eathernware or of gold, or of silver,—the
cleaning, in all cases, is to be done in the manner just described, and
in the manner that has been prescribed in connection with the original
substance of which it may be made. But, on its coining into contact with
urine and such things, the purification is to done in the manner laid
down in connection with the constituent material. In all cases, the
hands are to be washed, because of their being in contact with. such
sources of contamination as the man in an unclean state.

Says Gautama also—‘Having placed the pot somewhere near him, for the
purpose of purification,’ *etc, etc*., So, in the present verse, what is
meant by ‘holding’ is keeping near oneself, and not the actual holding
in the hand.

‘*Veda*’ is the name of ‘Kuśa-handful.’ The use for this consists in the
‘touching of the organs,’ which has been laid down as to be done with
‘Kuśa-blades.’

The upshot of all this is that things that serve transcendental purposes
shall be held on the body at all times, while those that serve only
visible purposes are to be kept only when need arises.

‘*Bright*. ’— Beautiful, in shape, and also by the burnishing of the
gold by heating and polishing.—(37)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 176), which explains ‘*vedam*’ as
‘handful of kuśa’, and ‘*raukme*’ as ‘golden’;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on
1.133);—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 320).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.3.3-5).—‘The Accomplished Student shall wear a lower and
an upper garment. He shall hold a bamboo-stick:—also the water-pot
filled with water; wearing two sacred threads,—a turban, a skin, shoes
and umbrella.’

Do. (1.6.7).—‘Vedic Study constitutes the Brahmayajña.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.12, 34, 35).—‘For the Accomplished Student, there shall
be a lower and an upper garment; two sacred threads and the water-pot
filled with water; he shall carry the bamboo-stick and wear golden
ear-rings; he shall not wear garland outside, except the golden
necklace.’

*Āpastamaba Dharmasūtra* (2.8.2).—‘Wearing a garland, with face and hair
washed, annointed, head turbaned, coated and wearing shoes and sandals.’

*Viṣṇu* (71.13-16).—‘Bamboo-stick,—water-pot with water, cotton sacred
thread,—golden ear-rings.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.133).—‘Wearing gold and the sacred thread, carrying the
bamboo and the water-pot.’

*Gobhila* (3.4.25-27).—‘Having bathed and adorned himself, wearing new
clothes, he shall tie the garland with the mantra *Śrīrasi mayi
ramasva*; then the shoes...and then the bamboo-stick.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3.8.9-16).—‘Having bathed with cold and hot
water, wearing unworn clothes,...he shall apply collyrium to the eyes;
then he wears the ear-rings; besmearing his hands with sandal-paste, the
Brāhmaṇa shall besmear his face; the Kṣatriya, his arms and the Vaiśya,
his belly;......then he shall tie the garland; but it should not be
called by the name of *mālā*...... then ho takes up the
umbrella......then the bamboo-stick...tying the jewel on his neck, he
ties the turban; and then proceeds to collect fuel.’

*Laugākṣi* (Aparārka, p. 176).—‘He shall wear untarnished gold.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

036	He shall carry a staff of bamboo, a pot full of water, a sacred string, a bundle of Kusa grass, and (wear) two bright golden ear-rings.
</details>
