+++
title = "043 नाऽश्नीयाद् भार्यया"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall not eat with his wife; nor shall he look at her while she is eating, or snoring, or yawning, or sitting at her ease.—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"नित्यम् आस्यं शुचि स्त्रीणाम्" (म्ध् ५.१३०) इति शुचित्ववचनम्, "स्त्रीशूद्रोच्छिष्टम्" (म्ध् ११.१५२) इति च प्रतिषेधः । द्वयम्[^१०२] अपि विषयविभागेन व्यवस्थितम् । तत्र शुचित्ववचनं "स्त्रियश् च रतिसंसर्गे" (ब्ध् १.९.२) इति स्मृत्यन्त्रदर्सनेन रतिस्त्रीविषयं विज्ञायते । अतः प्रतिषेधो ऽपि पारिशेष्याद् अरतिस्त्रीषु मातृभगिन्यादिषु द्रष्टव्यः । यतो रतिर् नेह प्रीतिमात्रम्, किं तर्हि मन्मथनिमित्तो भावविशेष इति शृङ्गारपूर्वको ऽभिलाषादिरूपः । अतस् तद्युक्तासु शुचित्वम्, विपरीतासु प्रतिषेधः ।


[^१०२]:
     M G: pratiṣedhadvayam

- रतिनिमित्तार्थतया भार्यया सह भोजने प्राप्ते वचनम् इदम् आरभ्यते- **नाश्नीयाद् भार्यया सार्धम्** इति । 

- अथ संसर्गग्रहणेन वृषस्यतो संप्रयोगविशेषः कथ्यते । तदानीं परिचुम्बनाद् एव शुचित्वम् इति नास्ति भार्यया सह भोजनप्राप्तिः । 

- तत्रेदं पुनर्वचनं व्रतज्ञापनार्थम् । ततश् च यावज्जीविकः संकल्पः कर्तव्यो यथा भार्यया सह भोजनं न भवति । 

- एतच् च सहभोजनम् एकाधिकरणम् एककालदेशं नञर्थविषयतया चोद्यत इति गतोच्छिष्टप्रतिषेधगतार्थशङ्केति[^१०३] । स पुनर् अयम् ईदृशः सहार्थविशेषः प्रमाणान्तरतः स्मृत्यन्तरसमाचारादेः । शेषशब्दार्थो[^१०४] ह्य् अन्यापेक्षितमात्रम् । तथा "इतरान् अपि सख्यादीन् । । । भोजयेत् सह भार्यया" (म्ध् ३.१०३) इति । नात्रैकाधिकरणता भुजेर् अवगम्यते, किं तर्हि भार्यया समानदेशता भोक्तुः, समानकालता वा । 


[^१०४]:
     M G 1st ed.: aśeṣaśabdārtho


[^१०३]:
     M G: gatvocchiṣṭe prati-

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् अन्यद् उच्छिष्टम् इति व्याचक्षते- भुक्तोज्झितम् उच्छिष्टम् । एकस्यां तु पत्न्यां एकस्मिन् कार्ये सह भोजनम् । 

- <u>एवं तु</u> व्याख्यायमाने शूद्रेण सह भोजनं प्रतिषिद्धं स्यात्, प्रसिद्धिश् च त्यक्ता भवेत् । अस्य संस्पर्शाद् उच्छिष्टव्यवहारः, सहभोजनेनापि तद् अस्ति[^१०५] । 


[^१०५]:
     M G: teṣv asti

- <u>केचित्</u> तु समानदेशकालम् एव भोजनं प्रतिषिद्धम्, दृष्टार्थत्वाद् उपदेशस्येति । पुंसा स्वभावभेदात् कश्चिद् बहुभोजिन्या न तुष्येत्, अन्यः स्वल्पभोजिन्याम् अपि विश्रम्भयतीति छद्मना वर्तते- मम पुरतः स्वल्पम् अश्नाति इति ।

- तथासदृशा एवम् अन्ये ऽपि नियमाः । **नैनाम् ईक्षेत चाश्नतीम्** । पश्यतो हि भुञ्जाना विवृतास्यतया रूपविकारेण भर्त्रे न रोचेत । क्षवथुः शिरस्थेन वायुना पूर्यमाणाया[^१०६] नासिकायाः शब्दस् तत्रापि वक्त्रवैकृत्यात् प्रीतिर् न स्यात् । **जृम्भमाणा**स्येन विलम्बितं वायोर् उच्छ्वसनम् अङ्गप्रत्यङ्गप्रसारणं वा । तद् अप्य् एवम् एव । **यथासुखं चासीना**[^१०७] अनवग्रथितकेशी भूमौ निपतितगात्री वा ॥ ४.४३ ॥


[^१०७]:
     M G: cāsīnām


[^१०६]:
     M G: pūryamāṇāyāṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Under 5.130, it is said that ‘the mouth of women is always pure,’ and
again one is advised to avoid ‘the leavings of women and Śūdras.’ Both
of these are true within their own limited sphere. When the mouth is
said to be ‘ever pure,’ it refers to the time of sexual intercourse, in
view of what has been declared in another *Smṛti* regarding ‘the purity
of the woman during sexual intercourse.’ From this it follows that the
prohibition applies to such a woman with whom one can never have such
intercourse; *e.g*., the mother, the sister, and the like. Specially
because what is prohibited here is not simply *affectionate treatment*,
but the entertaining of thoughts of love and longing preceded by the
erotic sentiment. Hence it follows that the ‘purity’ pertains to woman
related to such intercourse, and the prohibition to those not so
related.

The above considerations would give rise to the notion that one may eat
with one’s wife, who serves the purposes of sexual intercourse; hence
with a view to preclude such an idea, the text proceeds to declare—‘*he
shall not eat with his wife*.’

“As a matter of fact, what has been said regarding the ‘purity’ of the
woman’s mouth, refers to a particular form of advances that the man in
love generally makes, so that the purity can refer only to the act of
*kissing*; and there is no possibility of its making any one inclined to
eat with his wife.”

But the reiteration contained in the present verse is meant to show the
form of the *observance*; which means that one should make a life-long
vow that ‘he shall never eat with his wife.’

The ‘eating together’ that is mentioned here as the object of
prohibition is—(*a*) eating out of the same dish, (*b*) eating at the
same time and (*c*) eating at the same place. So that there can. be no
room for the idea that the pohibition applies to ‘leavings.’ That the
meaning of ‘eating *together*’ is as just mentioned we gather from other
Smṛti texts and from usage; as for ‘leavings,’ this term can only mean
what has been left.’ Thus, then, when it is said that—‘his friends and
others he shall feed *with his wife*’ (3.113),—it is clear that what is
meant is, *not* that they shall eat out *of the same dish* with the
wife, but that they shall eat at the same time and place with her.
\[Hence, it must be these latter that are forbidden by the present
verse\].

Others have explained ‘leavings’ as something different—as what has been
left after one has eaten. So that it would not be a case of ‘eating the
leavings’ when one eats in the same dish with one’s wife.

According to this explanation, what would be the object of the
prohibition would be *the eating with Śrūdas* (*Śūdras*?) only; and this
would involve the abandoning of universally accepted notions, under
which mere touch (of the Śūdra) is regarded as constituting ‘*ucciṣṭa*,’
‘leaving;’ and this touch is present also when two persons are ‘eating
together.’

Some people hold that what is forbidden is eating at the same time and
place; that this is so, follows from the fact that the teaching herein
contained is with a view to a visible purpose; the prohibition therefore
being based upon the fact that men differ in their nature, some men are
not pleased with their wife eating large quantities, while there are
others who, on finding their wife eating little, think that she is
deceiving him by eating little in his presence.

Similar to the above are the other restrictions: ‘*he shall not look at
her while she is eating*;’ if he sees her while eating, when she may be
opening her mouth wide, she may look ugly and thus fail to please her
husband.

‘*Snoring*’—is the sound made by the nose filled with the wind passing
down from the head. Here also the disfiguring of the face is likely to
make the husband displeased.

‘*Yawning*’—the prolonged breathing out of air with the mouth, or the
spreading out of the body and limbs. This also is undesirable on the
said grounds.

‘*Sitting at her ease*’—with hair diśevelled, with the body thrown upon
the ground.—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 180);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (on
1.125);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 123);—in *Vīramitrodaya*. (Āhnika, p.
479, and again in Saṃskāra, p. 578);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha*, (p. 71);—and
in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*, (p. 320).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 4.43-44)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (68.46).—‘He shall not eat with his wife, nor in the sky, nor
standing, nor while many men are looking on.’

*Viṣṇu* (71.25).—‘He shall not look at his wife while she is eating.’

*Viṣṇu* (72.26)—‘Nor a naked woman.’

*Gautama* (9.33).—‘He shall avoid the following:—kindling fire with the
mouth, wrangling, obtrusive wearing of garlands and sandal-paste, eating
with his wife, looking at her while she is applying collyrium to her
eyes, entering by the wrong door, eating while seated on a chair,
swimming in rivers, climbing of trees, etc., etc.’

*Śukranīti* (4.4.29).—‘Then her husband and lastly she herself shall
partake of food at the instance of her husband. She should then devote
her time to the examining of income and expenditure.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.29).—‘Not between two fires, nor between two Brāhmaṇas,
nor with his wife, shall one eat; by so doing, one obtains offspring
devoid of virility; this we learn from the Vājasaneya texts.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.131).—‘He shall not eat where his wife can see him, nor
with a single cloth, nor standing.’

*Yājñavalkya* (l.135).—‘He shall not look at the naked woman, nor after
intercourse.’

*Aṅgiras* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 479).—‘The wise do not perceive any
harm in a man eating with his own wife, or her leavings.’

*Smṛtyarthasāra* (Do.).—‘He shall not eat with his wife.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

043	Let him not eat in the company of his wife, nor look at her, while she eats, sneezes, yawns, or sits at her ease.
</details>
