+++
title = "045 नाऽन्नम् अद्याद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall not eat food with only one piece of cloth on him; he shall not bathe naked; he shall not pass urine on the road, nor on ashes, nor on the haunts of cows.—(45)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि यज्ञोपवीते नित्यानुगतत्वात् तस्य अनाच्छादकत्वाद् उपनयनविभेदेनोपदेशात् एकवासाः । अङ्गच्छादकादि[^११२] द्वितीयं वासो भोजनकाले स्यात् । **न मूत्रम्** । मूत्रग्रहणम् अत्रोत्सर्गस्योपलक्षणार्थम् । **पथि** रथ्यायाम् । **गोव्रजे** । येन यत्र वा गावश् चरितुं व्रजन्ति ॥ ४.४५ ॥


[^११२]:
     M G 1st ed.: anyonyachādakādi; G 2nd ed.: anyoṅgachādakādi
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though the man always wears his sacred thread (and hence, correctly
speaking, he is never with only one piece of cloth on), yet, since the
sacred thread is always on the body and it does not cover any part of
the body, and since the present injunction is apart from the section
dealing with Upanayana (where the wearing of the sacred thread is
prescribed),—he is regarded as ‘*having only one piece of cloth on
himself*.’ What the text means is that, at the time of eating, he shall
have on his body a second piece of cloth capable of covering his body.

‘*He shall not pass urine*.’—‘Urine’ here stands for excretions of all
kinds.

‘*Pathi*’—on the road.

‘*On the haunts of cows*’—the path by which cows pass, or the place
where they go to graze.—(45)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Govraje*’—‘The path by which, or the place at which, cows go to graze’
(Medhātithi);—‘cow-pen’ (Kullūka and Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in its second half in *Aparārka*, (p. 179);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 33), where ‘*Govraja*’ is explained as
‘*Goṣṭha*’;—in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 329);—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p.
153);—in *Nityācārapradīpa*, (p. 250);—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 71).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 4.45-49)  
**

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 35).—‘Pools, tanks, streams, hills,
cowdung, ashes, ploughed fields,—these he shall avoid; as also chaff,
fire-embers, potsherds, temples, public roads, cremation-ground, fields
and harvesting enclosures; he shall not do it in a shady place, or on a
visible road-crossing, or on beautiful spots; water, proximity of water,
path, tree-bases, worshipped trees and holes,—these he shall avoid.

*Brhannāradīya* (Do., p. 37).—‘On the road, in the cowpen, on
river-bank, in a tank, near a wall, under the shade of trees, in a
forest, near the fire, near Brāhmaṇas, cows, or elderly women,—one shall
not pass stool or urine.’

*Gautama* (9.45.13).—Not on ashes, nor on dry cowdung, nor on cultivated
ground. He shall not pass urine or excreta or throw any impure things,
while looking towards the wind, the fire, the Brāhmaṇa, the water,
deities or cows.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, pp. 35 and 38).—‘Not near a garden,
or a water-reservoir, or on barren ground, or on ground rendered unclean
by others; nor with shoes or sandals on; nor with umbrella, nor in the
sky nor facing women, or elders, or Brāhmaṇas, or cows, or temples, or
deities, or stars, or the wind.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11).—‘Urination should not be done in a river; nor on ashes,
nor on cowdung, nor in ploughed fields, nor in fields sown with seed,
nor on grass.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 35).—‘He shall not pass urine or
stool either in the public square or near the side-gate; nor in a
tīrtha, or sacrificial ground, or under sacrificial trees.’

*Baudhāyana* (3.2.44).—‘He shall not bathe naked.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.11).—‘Not on the road, nor on ashes, nor in haunts of cows.’

*Viṣṇu* (Aparārka, p. 180).—‘He shall not pass urine or stool on barren
ground; nor near a garden or a water-reservoir; nor in the sky.’

*Viṣṇu* (64.5).—‘Nor naked (shall he bathe).’

*Viṣṇu* (68.14).—‘Nor with a single cloth.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.4-22).—‘\[He shall not urinate or pass stool) on ploughed
ground; nor under a shadow; nor on barren ground; nor on grass; nor
where there are living creatures; nor in a hole; nor on an ant-hill, nor
on the road; nor on the lane; nor in a garden; nor near a garden or a
water-reservoir; nor on ashes; nor on fire-embers; nor on cowdung; nor
in places haunted by cows; nor in the sky; nor in water; nor before the
wind, the fire, the moon, the sun, a woman, the preceptor or the
Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 36).—‘One shall never urinate in
one’s own shadow, or in the shade of a tree, or facing the cow, the sun,
fire, wind, elders or twice-born men.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.30.18).—‘One shall not urinate or pass stool
with shoes on;—nor on ploughed ground, nor on the path, nor in water.
Spitting and sexual intercourse also should be avoided in water. He
shall avoid urinating and passing of stool in the presence of fire, the
sun, water, Brāhmaṇas, cows, or deities.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 36).—‘He shall avoid
the passing of urine and stool under the shade.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.131).—‘He shall not eat within sight of his wife, nor
with a single cloth, nor standing.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.134).—‘He shall not urinate in a river, or under shade,
or on the path, or in water, or on ashes; nor before the fire, or the
sun, or the cow, or the moon, or water, or twice-born men.’

*Śāṅkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 38).—‘Not facing the
sun, nor with knees towards the sun.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3.9.6).—‘He shall not bathe during the night;
he shall not bathe naked; he shall not sleep naked; he shall not look at
a naked woman, except... he shall not run while it is raining.’

*Pāraskara* (2.7.6).—‘Looking at sunrise, tree-climbing,
fruit-gathering, naked bathing,...... these he shall not do;—nor shall
he beg for food after bathing.’

Do. (2.7.15).—‘He shall not urinate or pass stool on fertile ground, or
on bare ground, or while walking or standing.’

*Śaṅkha*.—‘One shall not urinate either on cowdung or on ploughed
ground, or in a sown field, or on grass, or on ṭhe cremation-ground, or
on an ant-hill, or on the path, or in a place where grains are husked,
or in a place where cattle congregate, or in a hole, or on a hill, or on
a sandbank;—since all these are the receptacles of living beings.’

Do. (p. 180).—‘he shall not urinate facing the sun; those who do it,
facing the sun or the wind or the cow or the Brāhmaṇas, or the moon, or
the water or the twilights or the public road, lose their intelligence
and become short-lived.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘One shall not pass urine or stool on road-crossings and
side-gates, nor in ploughed fields, nor in a field with standing corns,
nor in sacrificial ground, nor under sacrificial trees.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 180).—‘He shall not pass urine or stool in an
uncovered place; nor with his lower garment on, nor naked.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

045	Let him not eat, dressed with one garment only; let him not bathe naked; let him not void urine on a road, on ashes, or in a cow-pen,
</details>
