+++
title = "049 तिरस्कृत्योच्चरेत् काष्ठ-"

+++

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

केचिद् इमं श्लोकम् अस्मिन्न् अध्याये नाधीयते[^१२०] ।


[^१२०]:
     J place this sentence before verse 4.53.

- <u>ननु</u> चोदङ्मुखस्य मेहनविधानात् पूर्वस्याम् उदयाच् च सूर्यस्य कुतस् तदाभिमुख्यं भवेद् येन प्रतिसूर्यं निषिध्यते ।

- अर्थवादो ऽयम्, "नातरिक्षे न दिवि" इतिवत् । अथ वोदगयने उदीचीं दिशम् आक्रमेत् स्यात् संभवः । प्रकृतविषयो वा प्रतिषेधः ।

- "प्रतिसंध्यम्" इति पठन्ति । तद् अयुक्तम् । "संध्ययोष् च यथा दिवा" (म्ध् ४.५१) इत्य् अनुज्ञानात्, वेगधारणस्य च निषिद्धत्वात् । तस्मात् "प्रतिवातम्" इति पठितव्यम् ।

- पूर्वशेषो ऽयम् । 

- **मेहतः** । शत्रंतस् तसन्तो वा । मेहतः पुरुषस्य, मेहनाद् वा ॥ ४.४९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“Since it has been laid down that one should pass urine, facing the
north,—and the sun rises in the east,—how can one ever face the sun, in
view of which possibility we have the present prohibition?”

The present verse is a commendatory supplement; just like the
assertion—‘not in the sky, nor in heaven, &c.’ Then again, during the
northern solstice, the sun moving towards the north, it would be
possible to face the sun. Or, the prohibition may be taken as meant for
the common people (who may not know the rule regarding urinating with
face towards the north).

Some people read ‘*pratisandhyam*.’ But this is not right; because
regarding the passing of urine we have the rule that ‘during the two
twilights it shall be done as during the day;’ and also because the
forcible checking of urine, etc., has been forbidden. For these reasons,
we should read ‘*prativātam*,’ facing the wind.’

This verse is supplementary to the foregoing one.

‘*Mehakaḥ*’—may be construed either as ending with the
Present-participial affix ‘*śatṛ*,’ or with the affix ‘*tas*’ (having
the sense of the Ablative); the meaning being—‘the man passing urine,’
or ‘by the passing of urine.’—(49)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse, which is 52 in Buhler, Burnell and Kullūka and other
commentators, is 49 according to Medhātithi, who remarks that ‘some
people do not read this verse in the present Discourse’. It is
interesting, in the light of this remark, to note that this verse is not
quoted in any of the important Nibandhas.

This verse is quoted in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 248), which explains
‘*saṃvītāṅgaḥ*’ as ‘with the sacred thread hanging by the neck.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 4.45-49)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
4.45].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

049	He may ease himself, having covered (the ground) with sticks, clods, leaves, grass, and the like, restraining his speech, (keeping himself) pure, wrapping up his body, and covering his head.
</details>
