+++
title = "092 ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall wake up at the point of time sacred to Brahman, and then think over the means of acquiring Merit and wealth, of the bodily troubles involved therein, and also of the true meaning of the Veda.—(92).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

त्रियामा रात्रिः, तस्याः पश्चिमो **ब्राह्मो मुहूर्तः** । तत्र निद्रां त्यजेत् । विबुद्धश् च तस्मिन् काले **धर्मार्थाव् अनुचिन्तयेत्** । यस्मिंश् च धर्म आसेव्यमाने यादृशः शरीरक्लेशो भवति तम् अपि चिन्तयेत् । स्वल्पश् चेद् धर्मो महान्तं कायक्लेशं जनयति, यो धर्मान्तरविरोधी, तं परिहरेत् । 

- अर्थो ऽपि सेवादिः अतिक्लेशकरः, सो ऽपि वर्ज्यः । "सर्वत एवात्मानं गोपायेत्" (ग्ध् ९.३४) इति । अनिश्चित्य न किंचिद् कुर्यात् । न च मनोराज्यादिविकल्पान् कुर्यात् । स्वभावो ह्य् अयं पुरुषाणाम् असति बाह्ये व्यापारे मनसो विकल्पाः परद्रव्याभिलाषादिरूपाः समुद्भवन्ति । तन्निवृत्त्यर्थम् इदं पुरुषार्थम् । 

- तस्यां वेलायां साध्यसाधनभावेन चिन्त्यो **वेदस्य तत्त्वार्थः** । रहस्यम् आत्मज्ञानं चिन्तयेद् वेदान्तविधिनाभ्यस्येत् ।

- <u>अथ वा</u> कर्मकाण्डे ऽपि यो वेदस् तस्यार्थस् तं निरूपयेत् । अयं विधिः, अयम् अर्थः, इदं कर्मैवं रूपम्, इयम् अत्र देवता, इदं द्रव्यम्, अयम् अत्राधिकारी, इयम् इतिकर्तव्यता, इत्यादि स्वबुद्ध्या निश्चिनुयात् । व्याख्यातॄणां मतभेदाद् धेतून् निरूपयेद् अस्य सम्यग्ज्ञानम् अस्य भ्रान्तिर् इति ॥ ४.९२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The night being divided into three parts, the last part is the ‘*point
of time sacred to Brahman*;’ and it is at this time that one should
renounce sleep.

Fully awakened at the said time, he shall ‘*think over the means of
acquiring merit (i.e., Duty) and Wealth*’; he should also think over the
bodily trouble involved in the performance of his duties (as bringing
merit); and if he finds that a certain duty is an unimportant one, and
yet its fulfilment involves much bodily trouble,—or, if he finds that it
stands in the way of another Duty,—then he shall omit such a duty.
Similarly, the means of acquiring *Wealth* also—such as service and the
like—are the source of much trouble; and this also shall be omitted; in
view of the principle that ‘one should protect oneself from all things.’

What is meant is that he should not do anything without having duly
thought over it, and that he should not indulge in building castles in
the air. It is the very nature of men that, when they are not outwardly
engaged, there arise in their minds many fancies, in the form of a
longing for obtaining what belongs to others, and so forth. And it is
the avoiding of this that the text lays down, with a view to the man’s
temporal interests.

At the said time, ‘*the true meaning of the Veda*’ should also be
thought over, in its bearing upon causes and effects. That is, one
should meditate, in the manner laid down in the Vedānta, upon the
esoteric science of the Soul. Or, in connection with the ritualistic
section of the Veda also, he should ponder over the real meaning of the
texts; that is, in his own mind he should determine that ‘this is an
Injunction,’ ‘this its meaning;’ ‘this the action prescribed,’ ‘this is
the form of the act,’ ‘this is the Deity of this sacrifice,’ ‘this the
material to be employed,’ ‘such and such a person is entitled to its
performance,’ ‘such and such is the procedure to be adopted,’ and so
forth. He should also ponder over the diverse explanations provided by
the Commentators, and with the help of reason, he should decide whose
explanation is correct and whose wrong.—(92).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 158);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 206), which explains ‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ as ‘the Supreme
Self’;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p, 204);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p.
13), which explains ‘*Brāhma muhūrta*’ as ‘the last quarter of the
night’, and adds that the time is so called because it is the time for
the awakening of *Brāhmī*, *i.e*., Bhāratī, the goddess of speech; and
that the term ‘*muhūrta*’ is to be taken as standing for *time* in
general, and not in the restricted technical sense of a period of 48
minutes; and this on the ground that 48 minutes would not suffice for
all those acts that are prescribed for being done after rising and
before sunrise. It goes on to add that according to other *Nibandhas*,
the last but one *Muhūrta* (48 minutes) of the night is called ‘Brāhma’,
because it is sacred to Brahman. The conclusion that it arrives at is
that those who have to perform all the acts of Vedic study and the rest
should rise in the beginning of the last quarter of the night, *i.e*.,
at 3 a.m. while others in the third *Muhūrta* of that quarter, *i.e*.,
after 4-36 a.m. It explains ‘*Tanmūlān*’ as ‘due to those acts that are
done for the sake of Dharma and Artha’; and the purpose for which all
this is to be pondered over is that if the labour involved in a certain
act is much, while the resultant Dharma or Artha is little, then it is
to be avoided.—‘*Vedatattvārtha*’—here the term ‘*tattva*’ has been
added for the purpose of excluding such meanings as might be deduced by
wrong methods of interpretation; or ‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ might stand for
Brahman.

This verse is quoted in *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 4), which explains
‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ as god, but quotes Śrīdatta to explain it as
‘*nyāyapratītor’thaḥ*’; it explains ‘*brāhmamuhūrta*’ as the last but
one *muhūrta* of the night.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.1).—‘Waking up at the point of time sacred to Brahman, he
should evacuate the bladder and the bowels.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.44).—‘Waking up at the latter end of night, he shall not
go to sleep again.’

*Vāmanapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 16).—‘One shall rise at the
moment sacred to Brahman, and think of the principal gods and sages.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.115).—‘Waking up at the point of time sacred to
Brahman, he shall ponder over his welfare, and he shall not neglect
spiritual merit or wealth or pleasure, each at its proper time.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (1.2.18.3).—‘Waking up at the point of time sacred to
Brahman, he shall ponder over spiritual merit and wealth, also over the
bodily trouble involved therein; then he shall meditate upon God.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (3.11.5-7).—‘Waking up at the point of time sacred to
Brahman, the wise man shall ponder over spiritual merit as also such
wealth as may not be obstructive of the former; he shall think also of
pleasure to the extent that it does not stand in the way of the other
two. Such wealth and pleasure as are obstructive of spiritual merit one
must abandon; as also such means of acquiring spiritual merit as may be
conducive to pain or condemned by the people.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.104.15).—‘He shall rise at the point of time sacred to
Brahman, and then ponder over spiritual merit and wealth.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 13).—‘Rising at the moment sacred to
Brahman, he shall do all that has been declared to be conducive to
Dharma.’

*Dakṣa* (Do.).—‘During the last two quarters of the night one shall be
devoted to Vedic Study.’

*Kāśikhaṇḍa* (Do., 8.15).—‘The last half-quarter of ṭhe night is the
moment sacred to Brahman; at that time should the wise man always rise
and ponder over his welfare.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

092	Let him wake in the muhurta, sacred to Brahman, and think of (the acquisition of) spiritual merit and wealth, of the bodily fatigue arising therefrom, and of the true meaning of the Veda.
</details>
