+++
title = "095 श्रावण्याम् प्रौष्ठपद्याम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having perfomed the “Upākarma” (starting rite) on the full- moon day in the month of Śrāvaṇa or of Bhādrapada, the Brāhmaṇa shall, with due diligence, study the vedas, according to rule, during four months and a half.—(95)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

श्रवणयुक्ता पौर्णमासी **श्रावणी** । एवं **प्रौष्ठपदी** । तत्र **उपाकृत्य** उपाकर्माख्यं कर्म कृत्वा **यथाविध्य् अधीयीत** । "प्राक्कूलान्" (म्ध् २.७५) इत्यादिप्रागुक्तो विधिः स्मर्यते । **युक्तस्** तत्परः । **छन्दांसि** वेदान् । छन्दःशब्दो ऽयं वेदवचनो न गायत्र्यादिवचनः । तेन ब्राह्मणादीन् अप्य् अधीयानस्यैष परमविधिः । उभयत्रापि चायं युक्त एव, प्रत्ययाविशेषात् । अयं विकल्पो व्यवस्थितः । "छन्दोगाः प्रौष्ठपद्याम् उपाकुर्वन्ति, बह्वृचा अध्वर्यवः श्रावण्याम्" ॥ ४.९५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The full moon day related to the asterism of *Śravaṇā* is called
‘*Śrāvaṇī*;’ similarly, ‘*Prauṣṭhapadī*.’—On either of these
days,—‘*having performed the rite known as* “*Upākarma*,”’—he shall
study the Vedas,—‘*according to rule*;’ this refers to the rules laid
down under 2.75 *et seg*.—*Yukta*—applying himself with diligence.

‘*Chandāṃsi*’— the Vedas. The term ‘*chandas*’ here stands for the Veda,
and not for the metres, *Gāyatrī* and the rest. Hence this same rule
applies also to the case of those who are studying the *prose-Brāhmaṇas*
(and is not restricted to those studying the metrical *saṃhitā* texts
only). It is only right that the rule should be so applicable, as both
(prose and metrical portions) are equally regarded as ‘Veda.’ In this
connection, the option referred to has been restricted to the extent
that the students of the Sāma-Veda perform the ‘Upākarma’ on the
full-moon day of *Bhādrapada*, while those of the Ṛgveda and the
Yajurveda do it on that of *Śrāvaṇa*—(95)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.142) to the effect that the
Veda is to be studied for four months and a half;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 518), which explains the compound ‘*ardhapāñcamān*’ as
‘*ardham pāñcamam yeṣām*’, *i.e*., four months and a half; and adds that
if on the day here specified there happen to be such conditions
antagonistic to study, as the non-appearance of the Venus and the
like—then the Upākarma should be performed on the Full-moon day of the
month of *Āṣāḍha*.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 499);—and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 84), which also explains the compound
‘*ardhapañcamān*’ as ‘*ardhāḥ pañcamo māso yeṣām*’;—*i.e*., for four
months and a half, counting from the day on which the *Upākarma*
ceremony is performed. It adds that this rule is applicable, not to the
Student only, but to the House-holder also.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 512), which adds that according to
the explanation provided by Hemādri, the particle ‘*api*’ is meant to
include the fifth day of the month of *Bhādrapada* as another
alternative day.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 186), which explains the construction
as—‘*Chandāṃsi upākṛtya tāni ardhapañcamān māsān adhīyīta*’; and
explains the compound ‘*ardhapāñcamān*’ as ‘*ardhaḥ pāñcamo māso
yeṣām*’;—the meaning being that from the day that the *Upākarma* is
performed, the man should go on studying the Veda for four months and a
half;—in *Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 298) as laying down Vedic study to be
done during four months and a half, during both the dark and the bright
fortnights;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 396), which adds that the particle
‘*api*’ is meant to imply the ‘*Bhādrapada—Śravaṇā—Hastā* and
*Pañcamī*’;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 171), which says that the
*Chandogas* are to do the *Upākarma* on the Full-moon day of
*Bhādrapada*, while all others are to do it on the same day in
*Śrāvaṇa*;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 147), which explains
‘*yuktaḥ*’ as ‘with due application.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (16.1-2).—‘Having performed the annual *Upākarma* on the
fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, he shall study the Vedas for
four months and a half, or throughout the *Southern Path* of the Sun.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.6.143).—‘Having performed the Upākarma on the fullmoon
day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra or Āṣādha, he shall perform the
*Utsarjana* on the fullmoon day of either Pauṣa or Māgha.’

*Āpastamba* (1.9.1-3).—‘On the fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra,
having performed the *Upākarma* of Vedic Study, he shall not study at
night for one month. He shall stop the study on the fullmoon day of
either Pauṣa or Mārgaśīrṣa. According to some people, the study has to
be carried on for four months and a half.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.1-5).—‘Next proceeds the Upākarma of Vedic Study: On the
fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, having kindled the fire and
performed the rites of fire-laying, he pours oblations into it to Gods,
Ṛṣis and the Vedas. Having made the Brāhmaṇas pronounce the benedictory
syllable *Svasti*, he shall eat curd and then *start* the Vedic Study,
and continue it for four and a half or five and a half months. After
that he is to study the Veda only during the brighter fortnight; but the
subsidiary sciences, he may read whenever he likes.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 519).—‘On the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa
or Āśāḍha or Bhādra has the performance of Upākarma been prescribed.’

*Viṣṇu* (30.1).—‘Having performed the *Upākarma* on the fullmoon day of
either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, he shall study for four months and a half.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.142).—‘He shall perform the *Upākarma* of the Vedas on
the appearance of herbs, either on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa or on a
day in Śrāvaṇa under the asterism of Śravaṇā, or on the fifth day of
Śravaṇā under the asterism of Hastā.’

*Āśvalāyāna Gṛhyasūtrā* (3.5.1-4).—‘Next comes the Upākaraṇa of the
Veda:—on the appearance of herbs, on that day of the month of Śrāvaṇa
which falls under the asterism of Śravaṇā;—or on the fifth day, under
the asterism of Hastā;—and he shall carry on the study for six months.’

*Pāraskara* (2.10.1-2).—‘Next comes the Upākarma of the Veda. On the
appearance of herbs, on the fullmoon day of the month of Śrāvaṇa, under
the asterism of Śravaṇā, or on the fifth day under the asterism of
Hastā.’

Do. (II. 10-11).—‘Having carried on the study for five months and a half
they should perform the *Utsarjana*; or after having studied for ten
months and a half.’

*Gobhila* (3.3.1, 13)—‘The *Upākaraṇa* is to he done oṇ the fullmoon day
of Bhādra under the asterism of Hastā;—according to others under the
asterism of Śravaṇā.’

Do. (Parāśaramādhava, p. 519).—‘The Taittirīyakas perform the Upākarma
on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa when it occurs after the fore-noon; the
Ṛgvedis do it on the asterism of Śravaṇā.’

*Pracetas* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 497).—‘The Upākarma should be
performed in the fore-noon on the fullmoon day.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Do., p. 500).—‘During the month of Śrāvaṇa, on the
Śravaṇā asterism; on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa, on the fifth day under
the asterism of Hastā, the prescribed *Upākarma* should be performed.’

*Śāṅkhyāyana* (Do., p. 500).—‘Next the Upākaraṇa—on the appearance of
herbs, under the asterism of Hastā or Śravaṇā.’

*Hiraṇyakeśin* (Do., p. 501).—‘Next we describe the Upākarma and the
Utsarjana—during Śrāvaṇa, on the appearance of herbs, or on the fullmoon
day under the asterism of Hastā, the Upākarma should be performed.’

*Maitra-Sūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 502).—‘During the rains,
under the asterism of Śravaṇā, he performs the Upākarma of the Veda.’

*Khādira-Sūtra* (Do., p. 503).—‘They perform the Upākarma of the Veda on
the fullmoon day of Bhādra, under the asterism of Hastā.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

095	Having performed the Upakarman according to the prescribed rule on (the full moon of the month) Sravana, or on that of Praushthapada (Bhadrapada), a Brahmana shall diligently study the Vedas during four months and a half.
</details>
