+++
title = "106 प्रादुष्कृतेष्व् अग्निषु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When lightning and the roar of thunder appear after the Fires have been lighted, the time shall continue to be unfit for study, till the lights are there; and when the remaining (phenomenon) ocours, it is unfit for study during the night, as also during the day.—(106).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

त्रिसंनिपाते पूर्वेणाकालिकम् उक्तम् । अनेन द्वयोः संनिपाते ऽपि **सज्योतिर्** उच्यते । स्तनितं च तन्निःस्वनश् चासौ **स्तनितनिःस्वनः** । विद्युच् च स्तनितनिःस्वनश् च **विद्युत्स्तनितनिःस्वनम्** । समाहारद्वन्द्वः । तस्मिन् संध्यायाम् उपजाते द्वये **सज्योतिर्** **अनध्यायः** । सूर्यो ज्योतिः **दिवा** । नक्तम् अग्निर् ज्योतिः । प्रातःसंध्यायाम् उत्पन्ने दिवैवानध्यायः, रात्रौ तु नास्ति । एवं पश्चिमसंध्यायां रात्राव् अनध्यायः, न प्रातर् अध्ययनदोषः । 

- विद्युत्स्तनितवर्षाणां त्रयाणां प्रकृतानां विद्युत्स्तनितयोर् विभज्य निर्देशो भवति । वर्षाः शेषः, तस्मिंस् तृतीये दृश्यमाने पूर्वोत्क आकालिको ऽनध्यायः । तदपेक्षयोक्तं **यथा दिवा** तथा **रात्राव् अपि**[^१८७] । ज्योतिः[^१८८] प्रसिद्धतरं ज्योतिष्टोमादि । शेषम् इति[^१८९] पाठः । शेषं हूयमानम् अहर् अनध्यायहेतुर् भवतीति । 


[^१८९]:
     M G 1st ed.: api


[^१८८]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: jyotiḥ


[^१८७]:
     M G place this phrase after jyotiṣṭomādi

- <u>अथ</u> कस्मान् नैवम् उक्तं शेषं त्व् आकालिकं स्मृतम् इति । 

- विचित्रा श्लोकानां कृतिर् मनोः ॥ ४.१०६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The previous verse (103) has declared that when the three
phenomena—lightning, thunder and rain—appear together, it is to be
regarded as ‘time unfit for study,’ till the same hour next day. The
present verse declares that when only two of these appear together, it
is unfit for study till the fights are seen.

The compound ‘*stanitaniḥsvanaḥ*’ means the *roaring of thunder*; and
this, with the term ‘*vidyut*,’ forms the copulative compound
‘*vidyut-stanitaniḥsvanaḥ*.’ When these two appear at twilight, it is to
be regarded as time unfit for study ‘*till the lights are there*.’
During the day, the sun is the ‘*light*,’ a nd during the night fire is
the ‘*light*,’ So that, if the phenomena appear at morning twilight, it
is unfit for study only during the day, not at night; similarly if they
appear at evening twilight, it is unfit for study during the night; and
there is nothing wrong in reading in the morning.

From among the three phenomena (mentioned in 103)—lightning, thunder and
rain’—two have been mentioned here separately. So that ‘rain’ is the
‘*remaining*’ phenomenon; and when this third phenomenon appears, it is
unfit for study till the same time next day. It is in view of this that
it is said ‘*during the night as also during the day*.’

Another reading is ‘*śeṣam*,’ which means the *remaining portion*, of
the well-known sacrifices of *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest; the sense being
that ‘the day on which these sacrifices are performed, the whole of that
day is unfit for study.’

“Wherefore did not the Author say simply—‘*śeṣam tvākālikam smṛtam*’
(which would be much simpler)?”

Manu’s methods of composing his texts are most peculiar.—(106).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“If these sounds are heard in the morning twilight, there should be no
study till the sun is up; when they are heard in the evening twilight,
there is to be no reading till the stars appear;—or if the two
disturbances occur, the intermission lasts as long as the sun or stars
remain; but if it also rains, then, as long as the day and night”
(Kullūka).—For ‘*śeṣe*’ Medhātithi notes another reading ‘*śeṣam*’ and
explains it to mean that ‘on the day that one offers the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
and other well-known sacrifices, the *śeṣa, remainder* of that day, is
to be regarded as *unfit for study*.’

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 526), which adds
that this refers to the Rainy season,—in other seasons, the whole day
and night is unfit for study;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 763), which has the
following notes:—When the phenomenon appears in the morning the holiday
extends as long as the Sun does not set, and if in the evening, then
till the setting of the stars; ‘*śeṣe*’, *i.e*., if it comes to rain,
then it is holiday during the day as well as during the night;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 56), which has the following notes—‘*Prāduṣkṛteṣu*
*etc*.,’ *i.e*., the morning and evening,—‘*sajyotiḥ*’ means that if it
happens in the evening then the whole night is ‘holiday’—‘*śeṣe*’, if it
rains, then the whole day and night; all this only when it occurs during
the Rainy season; in other seasons, these phenomena lead to a three
days’ holiday;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 150), which has the same
note, but explains ‘*śeṣe*’ as ‘*ṛtau*’;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla,
p. 194);—and in *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 566), which has ṭhe following
notes:—This lays down special rules regarding mere thundering during the
rains: if there is thundering in the morning, the entire day time is to
be kept as holiday; and if it occurs in the evening, then the night
only; ‘*śeṣe*’, *i.e*., on the occasion of the thunder and the rest
developing into rain, both the day and night are to be observed. The
‘Rainy season’ is here meant to stand for all the four months during
which there are rains. —*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla p. 197) notes that
there is to be holiday when there is not merely rain, but rain
accompanied by lightning and thunder, according to the rule as laid down
in the first part of the verse; the last part sets forth the rule for
cases of rain only.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.9.20-24).—‘If it thunders in the
evening,—then during the night; when there is lightning, then till one
goes to sleep; on the next day, if there has been thunder during the
preceding night; but only if this has been after midnight, say some.’

*Gautama* (16.23).—‘If there is thunder, rain or lightning, after the
fires have been lighted.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.9).—‘When meteor-fall and lightning appear
simultaneously, then for three days.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.145).—\[See above\].

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.24).—\[See above under 103-104.\]

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 188).—‘If it thunders in the evening, they shall
not study during the night: if it thunders in the morning they shall not
study during the day and night.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

106	But when lightning and the roar of thunder (are observed) after the sacred fires have been made to blaze, the stoppage shall last as long as the light (of the sun or of the stars is visible); if the remaining (above-named phenomenon, rain, occurs, the reading shall cease), both in the day-time and at night.
</details>
