+++
title = "107 नित्यानध्याय एव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In villages and cities, it is always unfit for study, for those who seek for perfect merit; as also in foul-shelling places.—(107).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निपुणं धर्मं ये कामयन्ते ते **ग्रामनगयोर्** नाधीयीरन् । **धर्म**शब्दश् च स्वर्गादौ धर्मफले वर्तते । यदि वाधर्मेणाननुवेधो[^१९०] **धर्मस्य नैपुण्यम्**, तेन सुपरिपूर्णो विध्यर्थो ऽनुष्ठितो भवति । अतश् चाशक्तस्यानुज्ञानं भवति । **पूतिगन्धः** कुत्सितगन्धः, तस्मिन् नासिकापथं गच्छत्य् **अनध्यायः** । **सर्वशः** सर्वस्मिन् शवगन्धे ऽपि ॥ ४.१०७ ॥


[^१९०]:
     J: -vedhā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Those who desire perfect merit, should not study in villages and
cities.—The term, ‘*dharma*,’ ‘*merit*’ *stands* for the *result* of
merit, in the shape of Heaven, &c. Or, the ‘perfection of merit’ may
consist in freedom from all contact with demerit; whereby the entire
purport of an Injunction becomes fulfilled. This would imply that the
said study may be permissible in cases of disability.

‘*Foul-smelling places*.’— There should be no studying in a place where
evil smell reaches the nose.

‘*All*’—*i*.*e*., in all cases of foul smell; *e.g*., even when there is
smell of a dead body.—(107)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 534), which
explains ‘*Dharmanaipuṇyakāmāḥ*’ as ‘those who have not yet got up the
Veda adding that for those who have already got up the Veda, there would
be nothing wrong in reading it in the village’;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p.
771), which has the following notes:—Those who have completed their
studies and carry it on further only for the sake of acquiring spiritual
merit are here spoken of as ‘*Dharmanaipuṇyakāma*’, those still engaged
in elementary studies are called ‘*vidyānaipuṇyakāma*’; it is for the
former that reading in villages and towns is here prohibited;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 161), which has the same note and adds
that the implication is that for those who are ‘*vidyānaipuṇyakāma*,’
reading in villages and towns is not forbidden;—and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 194), which notes that the holidays laid
down for the ‘*dharmanaipuṇayakāma*’ are not meant for others.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (16.19).—‘In the proximity of rotting smell, dead body,
Caṇḍāla or Śūdra.’

*Gautama* (16.46).—‘According to some, in the city, it is always unfit
for study.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.11.23).—‘When there is rotting smell in the wind, when
there is fog, and when there are sounds of dancing, music, musical
instruments, weeping, and Sāma-singing,—it will be unfit for study so
long as these last.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.10.24).—‘Hotting smell.’

Do. (1.10.31).—‘Unseasonable clouds, halos round the sun and the moon,
rainbow, rotting smell in the wind, fog,—in all these cases, it will he
unfit for study, till they last.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.5).—‘At sunset, during the twilight, if there is a dead
body in the house, or a Caṇḍāla, in cities, in places where cowdung has
been lying overnight, or which bear marks of the cowdung, near the
cremation-ground, while one is lying down, or after one has taken part
in a Śrāddha.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.150).—‘When there is dust-storm or fiery quarters,
during the twilights, when there is fog or when there is danger, while
one is running, when there is rotting smell, and when a
gentleman-visitor has come to the house.’

*Bharadvāja* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 530).—‘When there are
fire-portents or dust-storm there should be no reading in the village.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘When there is meteor-fall or fire-portent, there
should he cessation of the study of all subjects till they last.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

107	For those who wish to acquire exceedingiy great merit, a continual interruption of the Veda-study (is prescribed) in villages and in towns, and (the Veda-study must) always (cease) when any kind of foul smell (is perceptible).
</details>
