+++
title = "128 अमावास्याम् अष्टमीम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On the Moonless Day, on the eighth, on the Full Moon Day, and on the Fourteenth, the twice-born Accomplished Student shall always remain a “Religious Student,” even during the “season.”—(128)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ब्रह्मचारी भवेत्** । ब्रह्मचारिधर्मो मैथुननिवृत्तिर् अतिदिश्यते, न पुनर् भिक्षाचरणादिः । **अप्य् ऋताव्** इति संबन्धात् तद् एव प्रथमं हृदयम् आगच्छति । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> मधुमांसनिवृत्तिम् अपीच्छन्त्य् एतेष्व् अहःसु । तत्र स्मृत्यन्तरम् उदाहार्यम् ।

- षष्ठ्यष्टमीम् अमावास्याम् उभयत्र चतुर्दशीम् ।

- वर्जयेत् पौर्णमासीं च तैले मांसे भगे क्षुरे ॥

- <u>अन्ये त्व्</u> आहुर् ब्रह्मचारीति विशिष्टाश्रमिणो नामधेयम् एतत् । अत आश्रमान्तरवर्तिनि गृहस्थादौ प्रयुज्यमानो[^२०२] वेदग्रहणार्थधर्मलक्षणयातिदेशार्थो भवति । **ब्रह्मचारी भवेत्** । परशब्दो हि परत्र प्रयुज्यमानो वत्यर्थं गमयति । सर्वेषु ब्रह्मचारिधर्मेषु प्राप्तेष्व् अग्नीन्धनभैक्ष्यचरणादयः "आ समावर्तनात् कुर्यात्" (म्ध् २.१०८) इति वचनात्, "गृहस्थः शेषभुक्" (म्ध् ३.१०७) इति च प्रत्यक्षे विनिवर्तन्ते । केवलं मधुमांसमैथुनप्रतिशेधमात्रम् अतिदिश्यत इति । 


[^२०२]:
     M G: prayujyamāne

- <u>प्रसिद्धस्</u> तु ब्रह्मचारिशब्दो मैथुननिवृत्ताव् एवेति, यत्किंचिद् एतत् ॥ ४.१२८ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Shall remain a Religious Student*.’—Abstention from congugal
intercourse is among the duties of the Religious Student; and it is this
that is meant here; and not the other duties of begging food, and so
forth. Specially, as the phrase ‘even during the season’ brings to mind
that one duty first of all.

Others hold that, during the days mentioned, the eating of honey and
meat is also meant to be avoided. In support of this view, it is
necessary to quote another *Smṛti-* text: ‘The use of oil, meat, the
female generative organ and the razor is to be avoided on the sixth, on
the Moonless Day, on the fourteenth of both fortnights and on the Full
Moon Day.’

Others, again, have offered the following explanation:—“‘Religious
Student’ is the name given to a person in a particular Life-stage;
hence, when it is applied to the Householder and persons in other
life-stages, it becomes simply indicative of that peculiar
characteristic of the Religious Student which consists in the
performance of duties conducive to Vedic Study; this is the case with
the expression, ‘should remain a Religious Student.’ When the name of
one thing is applied to another, it denotes *similarity*; and, in
accordance with this principle, the expression would mean the adoption
of all the duties of the Religious Student,—such as begging for food,
tending of the Fire, and so forth. But the presence of such directions
as, ‘all this should be done *till the ceremony of Return*’ (2.108), and
‘the Householder shall eat the remnants,’ clearly preclude the said
duties of ‘begging for food’ and the like (which would be incompatiable
with the duty of ‘eating the remnants’) \[and the other duties are
clearly laid down as to be observed only *till the ceremony of Return*
\]. So that, the expression in question can only indicate the avoiding
of Honey, Meat and Sexual Intercourse (which is among the duties of the
Religious Student, and is compatible with the life of the Householder).”

But there is not much in all this; since the term, ‘Religious Student,’
is generally used in the sense of ‘avoiding sexual intercourse.’—(128)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.79);—in *Aparārka* (p. 103),
which adds that on the ground of the terms ‘*Aṣṭami*’ and ‘*Caturdaśī*’
occurring along with ‘*Amāvasyā*’, it is understood that they stand for
the eighth and fourteenth days of the *Fortnight*,—not of the
‘season’;—and that the particle ‘*api*’ indicates that intercourse on
the dates mentioned is to be avoided, also when they happen to fall
outside the ‘season’;—and in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 724), which adds that
‘*Aṣṭamī*’ and ‘*Caturdaśī* mentioned as they are along with
‘*Amāvasyā*,’ must stand for the eighth and fourteenth days *of the
fortnight*, not those of the wife’s ‘period.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 346);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra,
p. 498), which adds that the passage is to be construed as
‘*strīsaṅgatyāgena brahmacārī bhavet*’; ‘on the dates of the month
specified, one should behave like the Student by avoiding intercourse
with his wife’;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 286 and 368), as forbidding
sexual intercourse on ‘*parva*’ days, and adds that ‘*snātakaḥ*’ here
stands for the *House-holder*;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 683);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 38);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
155), which adds that the particle ‘*ca*’ is meant to include the
*Saṅkrānti* day,—and explains the term ‘*snātaka*’ to mean ‘one whose
wife has bathed for her season.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (13.140.11).—‘One who approaches his wife only during the
periods remains a *Religious Student*.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.1.17).—‘Recourse to one's wife during the
periods is in itself an observance.’

Do. (Aparārka, p. 104).—‘The observances of the householder...... He
shall not approach his wife on the eighth, fourteenth and fifteenth days
of the fortnight.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.79).—‘He should avoid his wife during the *Parvas*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.18).—‘One should have recourse only to his wife, only
during her periods, avoiding the *Parvas*.’

*Viṣṇu* (68.1).—‘He shall not approach his wife on the eighth, the
fourteenth and the fifteenth days of the month.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.36).—‘He shall not eat meat, nor shall he approach
his wife.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 499).—‘The fourteenth, eighth,
moonless day, full moon day, the day on which the sun passes from one
sign to the other, are the *Parvas*; one who has recourse to his wife on
these days goes to hell.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

128	A twice-born man who is a Snataka shall remain chaste on the new-moon day, on the eighth (lunar day of each half-month), on the full-moon day, and on the fourteenth, even (if they fall) in the period (proper for conjugal intercourse).
</details>
