+++
title = "129 न स्नानम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall not bathe after a meal, nor when he is ill, nor at midnight, nor along with his garments; and never in an unknown water-reservoir.—(129)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नित्यस्य स्नानस्य भुक्तवतः प्राप्त्यभावान् नायं प्रतिषेधः । स्मृत्यन्तरे हि "स्नानं महायज्ञाः शेषभोजनम्" इत्य् अर्थक्रमः श्रुतः । न चण्डालस्पर्शनादिनिमित्तकस्यापि, "नाशुचि क्षणम् अपि तिष्ठेत्" इति विरोधात् । अत इच्छालक्षणस्य घर्माद्यपनोदहेतोर् अयं प्रतिषेधः । 

- **आतुरो** व्याधिगृहीतः । तस्य सर्वप्रकारस्नानप्रतिषेधो ऽशुचित्वे पि "सर्वत एवात्मानं गोपायेत्" इति (ग्ध् ९.३४) । का तर्हि तस्य शुद्धिः । मार्जनं मन्त्रवत् प्रोक्षणं वस्त्रत्याग एवमादि कर्तव्यम् ।

- **महानिशा** चतुर्मुहूर्त[^२०३] उभय्तो ऽर्धरात्रितः[^२०४] । <u>ये तु</u> "महती निशा यस्मिन् काले हेमन्तादौ" इति व्याचक्षते, <u>तेषां</u> माघफाल्गुनयोः प्रातःस्नानविधिविरोधाद् अपव्याख्यानम् । नापि हैमन्तिकीषु रात्रिषु निषेध इति प्रमाणम् अस्ति द्वितीयस्य निशाशब्दस्याभावात् । 


[^२०४]:
     M G: 'rdharātrikaḥ


[^२०३]:
     M G: munyukta

- **वासोभिर्** इति सामर्थ्यलक्षणे शीतादौ वाससां बहुत्वे सति प्रतिषेधः । एकेन विहितम् एव "न नग्नः स्नायाद्" (ग्ध् ९.६०–६१; च्ड़्। म्ध् ४.४५)) इति । द्वाभ्याम् अनियमः । बहूनां प्रतिषेधः । 

- **जलाशयो** जलाधारः । **अविज्ञातः** गाधागाधतया ग्राहादिभयेन च । **अजस्रं** सर्वदेत्य् अर्थः ॥ ४.१२९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This prohibition does not apply to the daily bath; since there is no
possibility of its ever being done after the meals; specially, as in
another *Smṛti-text*, the order of sequence has been distinctly laid
down as—‘(1) Bath, (2) the Great Sacrifices and (3) the Eating of
Remnants.’ Nor can the prohibition apply to the bath necessitated by
touching of the Cāṇḍāla and such other circumstances; because such a
prohibition would be contrary to the general law that ‘one shall not
remain impure for a single moment.’ From all this it follows that the
prohibition applies to that purely voluntary bathing which one has
recourse to for the relieving of heat and perspiration, etc.

‘*Ill*’—suffering from some disease. For the sick person, all kinds of
bath have been forbidden, even when he may have become unclean;
specially in view of the direction that ‘one shall protect himself from
all things.’

*Question*—“How would such a man be purified?”

*Answer*— He shall sprinkle water over his body, or wipe off his body
with Mantras, or change his clothes, and so forth.

‘*Midnight*,’ ‘*Mahāniśā*;’—*i.e*., Four ‘*muhūrtas*,’ two on each side
of midnight.

Some people explain the term ‘*mahāniśā*’ as ‘*Long Night*,’ such as we
have during the winter.

But this explanation (by which bathing during winter-nights would be
forbidden) would be contrary to the Injunction that lays down early
morning bath during the (winter) months of *Māgha*, and *Phālguna*; and
as such, it must be regarded as a wrong explanation. Nor is there any
ground for restricting the prohibition to *winter nights* only;
specially as the text does not contain a second ‘*niśā*’ (which alone
could afford the sense, ‘during the night of those months when nights
are long.’)

‘*Along with his garments*.’—This implies that the prohibition applies
to the case where, during the cold weather, a man is wearing several
pieces of clothes; especially bathing with one piece of cloth on is what
has been already enjoined by such directions as ‘he shall not bathe
naked’ (4.45);—When he is wearing *two* pieces of cloth, there is
uncertainty, he may or may not bathe;—but when he has several pieces on,
he shall not bathe.

‘*Water-reservoir*’—containing water;—‘*unknown*’—*i.e*., with regard to
which it is not known whether it is deep or not deep, or whether there
are, or are not, allegators in it.

‘*Ajasram*’—ever, always.—(129)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 135);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 159), which adds that what the first quarter forbids is
‘that bathing which one may do voluntarily, without any occasion, after
having taken his food’; it cannot refer to the obligatory daily bathing,
which must precede the breakfast; nor can it refer to the bathing that
is rendered necessary by the touching of a *cāṇḍāla* or other unclean
things, since it has been laid down that ‘one should not remain unclean
for a single moment.’ \[This it quotes as from Medhātithi\];—then even
after food, if such occasions should arise as an eclipse and the like,
one must bathe;—‘*āturaḥ*’ is explained as ‘one suffering from a disease
likely to be aggravated by bathing’,—and ‘*mahāniśā*’ as the second and
third quarters of the night;—the phrase ‘*na vāsobhiḥ*’ is explained as
indicating that on those occasions on which it is laid down that one
should bathe ‘along with his clothes,’ there would be nothing wrong in
doing so even when one is wearing several pieces of cloth.—‘*Ajasram*’
means ‘constantly.’—The bathing that is forbidden here is such as is
done by men either through sheer foolishness or through false notions of
purity,—and not that which becomes necessary on one’s arrival at a
sacred place.—‘*Avijñāte*’—means those ‘water-reservoirs’ in regard to
which it is not known whether they are deep or otherwise, free or not
from alligators and other animals, dug by respectable men or otherwise,
and duly consecrated or not.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 246);—in *Kālaviveka* (p. 340);—in
*Smṛtitattva, on* p. 38, where it is added that what is forbidden is
*frequent bathing*, as is clear from the adverb ‘*ajasram*’;—on p. 160,
where it adds that the prohibition of bathing at night does not apply to
bathing at an eclipse;—and on p. 365, where it is explained as referring
to that bathing which is done for the mere love of doing it,—and not to
that which is rendered necessary on certain occasions and circumstances,
nor to the daily bathing;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 708), which has the
following notes:—‘*Bhuktvā*,’ this prohibition does not refer to the
ordinary daily bath; nor to the bath necessitated by the touch of the
Cāṇḍāla, as that impurity must be got rid of immediately; it must refer
to the voluntary bath for mere pleasure;—as regards the ‘*ātura*,’
sick-person, the full bath is forbidden for him at all
times;—‘*ajasram*’ means ‘constantly’;—also in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p.
857);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 306), which has the same note, and says
such is the opinion of Medhātithi; it is only the ordinary bath (not
religious) that is forbidden at ‘dead of night’ and ‘constantly,’ so
also ‘*avijñāte*.’ &c.—which means ‘that water-reservoir in regard to
which it is not known how deep it is or whether or not it is
objectionable in any way’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 273).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.24).—‘Bathing after sunset (he shall avoid).’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.32, 8).—Do.

*Viṣṇu* (64.3.4.6).—‘Nor when suffering from indigestion, nor when he is
distressed,—nor during the night and—except when there is an eclipse—nor
in the evening.’

*Āśvalāyana* (3.9.6).—‘He shall not bathe at night; nor naked; he shall
not sleep naked.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 135).—‘One should avoid bathing in a river in the
evening.’

Do. (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 159).—‘One shall avoid bathing at
twilights and at midday.’

Do. (Do., p. 160).—‘The middlemost quarters of the night are called
Mahāniśā; at that time one shall not bathe, except when it happens to be
an obligatory or circumstantial hath.’

*Jābāla* (Do.).—‘One should not bathe in another’s tank, nor after
taking food, nor at midnight.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

129	Let him not bathe (immediately) after a meal, nor when he is sick, nor in the middle of the night, nor frequently dressed in all his garments, nor in a pool which he does not perfectly know.
</details>
