+++
title = "152 मैत्रम् प्रसाधनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the forenoon, he shall perform the evacuation of bow els, toilette, bath, cleaning of the teeth, dying of the eyes, and the worship of the gods.—(152)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अर्थवादेषु पश्वङ्गसंस्तवे **मैत्रः** पायुर् इति श्रूयते । तद् इहाप्य् अभेदोपचारान् मित्रः पायुस् तत्र भवं शौचं **मैत्रम्** । **प्रसाधनं** केशरचनाम् उपलेपनादि । अथ वा विशेषणविशेष्ये पदे "**मैत्रं प्रसाधनम्**" । अकृतशकृतापि प्रातः पायुप्रक्षालनं कर्तव्यम् । यथा हि सुप्तस्य लालास्रावादेर् अवश्यं भावित्वान् मुखधावनं विहितम्, एवम् एतद् अपि विनैव वा निमित्तेन मुखस्य जघन्ययोर् अङ्गयोः प्रक्षालनम् अवश्यं कर्तव्यम् । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुर् मित्रकार्यं **मैत्रम्**, तत् सर्वकार्येभ्यो ऽन्तरङ्गेभ्यो ऽपि पूर्वं कर्तव्यम् । तत्राप्य् अशुचेः क्षणम् अप्य् अवस्थाभावात् स्वकार्यापेक्षया पूर्वत्वं द्रष्टव्यम् । तदा च **पूर्वाह्ण**शब्दः कार्यान्तरेभ्यः पूर्वतामात्रोपलक्षणार्थः, न पुनर् अपराह्णप्रतिषेधार्थः । 

- <u>अथ वा</u> मित्र आदित्यः । तदुपस्थानं **मैत्रम्** ॥ ४.१५२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Among Vedic passages describing the limbs of animals, the excretory
organ is called ‘*Mitra*;’ taking the term ‘*Mitra*’ in the same sense
here also, its derivative ‘*maitra*’ is taken to mean the ‘clearing of
the excretory organ’.

‘*Toilette*’—dressing of the hair, painting, and so forth. Or, the two
terms ‘*maitram*’ and ‘*prasādhanam*’ may be construed together, as noun
and adjective, which would mean that, even without passing any faeces,
one should wash his excretory organ, just as the washing of the mouth
after sleep has been prescribed as necessary, in view of the fact that,
during sleep, saliva is sure to flow out; similarly, even in

the absence of any direct reason, it is necessary to wash the mouth as
also the lower limbs of the body.

Others explain that ‘*maitra*’ means ‘the act of a *maitra*, friend the
*friendly act*; and what the text means is that ‘friendly acts should be
done before all other, even the most entimately necessary, acts but the
precedence to be given is only over the acts that one may do for his own
benefit, and *not* those that have to be done for the sake of
cleanliness. In this case, the term ‘*forenoon*’ would mean only
*precedence over the other acts*, and not the *exclusion of the
afternoon*.

Or again, ‘Mitra’ may stand for the sun; and ‘*Maitra*’ in that case
would mean ‘the worshipping of the Sun.’—(152)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika), on page 31, where it
is noted that all this to be done in the forenoon is meant for persons
not otherwise engaged;—that the term ‘*Pūrvāhṇa*’, ‘forenoon’, really
stands for ‘early morning’, since ‘the evacuation of the bowels’, and
‘cleaning of the teeth’ have been laid down as to be done in the early
mornings—Hence the term ‘forenoon’ should be taken to stand for such
parts of the forenoon as have been specifically prescribed for each of
the acts; thus it follows that the ‘evacuation of the bowels’, ‘cleaning
of the teeth’ and ‘morning-bath’ cannot be done-after sun-rise in regard
to the ‘worshipping of gods’, the term ‘forenoon’ should be understood
as standing for the first eighth part of the day.—The verse is quoted
again on page 148;—and in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 290).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Dakṣa* (2.4-6).—‘What is to be done during the first part of the day is
now prescribed,—as also that to be done during the second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth parts of the day, generally: at
dawn, one shall perform the evacuations, and then bath, preceded by the
cleansing of the teeth.’

*Dakṣa* (30.31.33).—‘After that he shall perform his duty towards the
gods, and then the seeing of the teacher and the auspicious things; the
forenoon is the time prescribed for the duty to the gods; the duties to
the gods should be performed during the forenoon; and those to the men,
during midday; those to the pitṛs, in the afternoon...... If what has
been laid down as to be done in the forenoon is done in the evening, it
becomes absolutely futile.’

*Kālaviveka* (p. 367).—‘Duties to the gods should be performed during
the forenoon, those to the Pitṛs, in the afternoon; but the unitary
Śrāddha should be performed at midday, and the auspicious Śrāddha in the
morning.’

*Mahābhārata* (Anuśāsana, 61.2).—‘Fully equipped with auspicious rites,
duly purified and with due care, he shall perform the duty towards gods
in the forenoon, and that towards Pitṛs in the afternoon.’

Do. (Do., 161.25).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

152	Early in the morning only let him void faeces, decorate (his body), bathe, clean his teeth, apply collyrium to his eyes, and worship the gods.
</details>
