+++
title = "176 परित्यजेद् अर्थ-कामौ"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall, avoid such wealth and pleasures as are opposed to righteousness, as also righteousness if it be conducive to unhappiness, or disapproved by the people.—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तस् त्रिवर्गः पुरुषार्थः । कश्चित् तुल्यतां मन्यमानः — अर्थकामपरिहारेण यथा धर्मः सेव्यते तद्विरोधी ज्योतिष्टोमादिः । स ह्य् अर्थविरोधी दक्षिणादिदानेन, कामविरोधी दीक्षितस्य ब्रह्मचर्यविधानात् । एवम् अर्थकामाव् अपि धर्मपरिहारेण न सेवेत । तत्र "न हिंस्याद् भूतानि" इति यत्र कामो हिंसाया वैरानुबन्धाद् यः कश्चिद् वक्तुम् इष्यते तत्र स विषयप्रतिषेधाय, यत्र तु कस्यचिद् धिंसयार्थकामाव् इष्येते तत्र नास्ति हिंसादोषः — इति पर्वर्तते, तद्भ्रान्तिनिवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । 

- **परित्यजेत्** परिहरेत् तादृश्**आर्थकामौ** यत्र धर्मविरोधः । एवं सर्वतो धर्मस्य बलीयस्त्वम् उक्त्वा कस्मिंश्चिद् विषये तस्यापि परिहर्तव्यताम् आह- **धर्मं चाप्य् असुखोदर्कम्** । उदर्कः उत्तरकालः, सो ऽसुखो यस्य — यथा सर्वस्वदानं वा ददाति "धार्मिको ऽयं[^२३५] महापुण्यः" इति, यथा नदीतीरेष्व् एकान्तेष्व् अपि प्राकृतजना बहवः पश्यन्ति तत्र स्नानम् । भवतीत्य् अर्थस्नानं धर्मार्जनसमक्षापेक्षा[^२३६] तु साधुवादाय । यथा च तीर्थकाकेभ्यो दानम् । भवति दानं धर्मः, दातृत्वप्रसिद्ध्युत्पादनार्थत्वात् — तेभ्यो भिद्यते[^२३७] । अथ वा यद् गर्ह्यतया लोकः संक्रोशति — यथा गोर् अवध्यस्य वधः, मांसस्य भक्षणं च — तद् विगर्हिततरं पश्वन्तरेभ्यो लोके । दृष्टमूलश् चायम् अहिस्पर्शवत् प्रतिषेधः । विहितो ऽयम् अर्थ इत्य् अवैद्यतया प्राकृतजना अजानाना अधार्मिकत्वं यष्टुः प्रख्यापयेयुस् तेषां च बहुत्वतः प्रसिद्ध्या शिष्टा अप्य् एवं प्रसिद्धमूलम्[^२३८] अनवगच्छन्तः परिवर्जयेयुः । तद् उक्तम् "धार्मिके सति राजनि" (म्ध् ११.१०) इति । 


[^२३८]:
     DK (5: 618) suggests: prasiddhaṃ mūlam


[^२३७]:
     M G: nindyate; DK (5: 618) suggests: vidyate


[^२३६]:
     DK (5: 618) suggests: tīrthasnānaṃ dharmārjanaṃ samakṣāpekṣā


[^२३५]:
     M G: dharmakoyaṃ

- एतद् उक्तं पूर्वैर् व्याख्यातम् इत्य् अनुगतम् । न हि प्रत्यक्षश्रुतिविहितस्य स्मृत्या बाधो न्याय्यः । इदं तु युक्ततरम् उदाहरणम् । नियोगधर्मः स्मृत्या विहितो **लोकसंक्रुष्टत्वान्** न क्रियते । तथा यः कश्चिद् अनाथतरुणीं स्त्रियं कारुण्याद् बिभर्ति, तत्र यदि लोकसंक्रोष आशङ्क्यते — स्त्रीत्वेनैवास्मा एषा रोचते — स **लोकसंक्रुष्ट**धर्मः ॥ ४.१७६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above that the ‘group of three’ constitutes the ‘ends
of man.’ Some people might think that all the three are equally
important, and argue as follows and act accordingly Righteous acts, like
the Jyotiṣṭoma, &c., are found to be performed at the cost of wealth and
pleasure. Such acts lead to loss of wealth by the giving away of the
sacrificial fee and other gifts; and they are opposed to pleasure,
inasmuch as it has been laid down that the person initiated for
sacrifices shall remain continent, and so forth. Exactly in the same
manner, it would be right to have recourse to the acquisition of wealth
and pleasure at the cost of righteousness, so that the prohibition, ‘One
shall not injure any living beings,’ forbids only such injury as one
might inflect upon others simply on account of enmity, and not that
which brings to the person wealth or pleasure.”

It is with a view to preclude such ideas that the text declares
that—‘*He shall avoid such wealth and pleasure*’ as involve opposition
to righteousness.

Having thus emphasized the superior importance of Righteousness, he
proceeds to add that, in some cases, righteous acts also have to be
avoided—‘*also righteousness if it be conducive to unhappiness*.’
‘Udarka’ means *sequence*; that whose sequence is unhappy is
‘*asukhodarka*.’ For instance, some people give away their entire
property, and obtain the fame of being an ‘extremely righteous and
charitable person;’—or, when, even on solitary river-banks, where many
ordinary persons see what is being done, people bathe, not so much for
acquiring spiritual merit, but for winning the praise of the
populace;—or, again, when large gifts are made to the ‘crows of sacred
places’ (the Brāhmaṇas, at these places, who hanker after gifts), for
the purpose of advertising their, powers of giving. All such acts are
deprecated.

Or, again (one should avoid), such acts as are ‘*disapproved by the
people*,’ as being blameworthy; *e.g*., the killing (at sacrifices) of
the bull, which should not be killed; and the act of eating its flesh is
more blameworthy than that of eating other kinds of flesh.

This prohibition is with a view to perceptible results, just like the
prohibition of touching a snake. Ordinary men, being ignorant, would not
know that the killing of the bull is permitted (under special
conditions), and would therefore make it known that the sacrificer of
the bull is an unrighteous person; and, as a large majority of men are
illiterate, even cultured persons, not caring to investigate the source
of the popular opinion, would avoid the person (as unrighteous). This is
what has been said in the passage—‘the king being righteous,’ etc.,
etc..

What we have said above, is in accordance with the explanation provided
by older writers. As a matter of fact, however, it can never be right to
reject, on the strength of *Smṛti*, what has been enjoined by the Veda.
The right example of the act aimed at by the Text is as follows: The
custom of ‘*niyoga*’ (‘begetting of a child on the widowed
sister-in-law’) is sanctioned by Smṛtis; but it is not performed,
because it is ‘deprecated by the people;’ or, again, when one is
supporting an unprotected young woman, entirely through pity,—if people
show their disapproval by giving out that ‘she appeals to hiś generosity
because she is a woman,’—then the said righteous act of supporting would
be one that is ‘deprecated by the people.’—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 159);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 11), which would restrict the rule to only such ‘*dharma*’
as is ‘*dṛṣṭārtha*’, ‘prescribed for the purpose of perceptible worldly
results.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (71.84.85).—‘Wealth and Pleasure, opposed to Righteousness (he
shall avoid);—also such Righteousness as may be disapproved by the
people.’

*Āpastamba* (7.20.22).—‘He shall enjoy such pleasures as are not
incompatible with righteousness.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.156).—‘In act, mind and speech he shall carefully do
what is right; and he shall not do what is right if it happens to he
such as is not conducive to heaven, or disapproved by the people.’

*Gautama* (9.47).—‘While wearing shoes, he shall avoid eating, sitting,
accosting and saluting.’

*Śukranīti* (3.4-5).—‘He shall not try to attain liberation without
trying to attain the other three purposes, and he shall follow the path
of liberation without disregarding the other three. This is the golden
mean.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

176	Let him avoid (the acquisition of) wealth and (the gratification of his) desires, if they are opposed to the sacred law, and even lawful acts which may cause pain in the future or are offensive to men.
</details>
