+++
title = "203 नदीषु देवखातेषु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall always bathe in rivers and in tanks and lakes dug by the gods; as also in water-holes and springs.—(203)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सर्वा **नद्यो देवखाताः** । अतस् तासाम् उभयथासंभवाद् देवखातग्रहणवाच्यत्वेन तल्लिङ्गं पठितव्यम् । **तडागादीनि** हि **देवखातानि** मनुष्यखातान्य् अपि सन्ति । न च देवैः खन्यन्ते । केवलं महत्वम् अस्मर्यमाणकर्तृकत्वेन[^२५७] लक्ष्यते ॥ ४.२०३ ॥


[^२५७]:
     M G: mahatvaṃ smaryamāṇakartṛkatvena
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

As a matter of fact, all *rivers* are ‘dug by the gods;’ hence they
cannot be both, which would necessitate the differentiation connoted by
the epithet; hence the gender of the epithet should be that of the
things qualified by it. As for *tanks*, etc., these are ‘dug by gods’ as
well as ‘dug by men. (Hence, in their case, the differentiation is
necessary). As a matter of fact, these are never actually *dug by the
gods*; all. that is meant to be indicated by the epithet, therefore, is
their *largeness* and *importance*, due to the fact that people do not
remember who dug them.—(203)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Garta*’—‘Pits’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa);—‘a small brook whose course
does not extend beyond a thousand *Dhanuṣ*, *i.e*., 2,000 yards’
(Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 234), which, in explaining the
word ‘*garta*’, quotes from Kātyāyana to the effect that water-streams
that do not run beyond 2004 yards are called ‘*garta*’. This same text
is quoted by Kullūka as from *Chandoga-pariśiṣṭa*. \[Buhler wrongly puts
down this name as ‘*Chandogya-priśiṣṭa*’\]. —‘*Prasravaṇa*’—is a small
water-spring running down from hills.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.159), which adds that this rule refers
to the daily compulsory bath;—in *Kālaviveka* (p. 330);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 181), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Nadī*’ should be taken as standing for such streams as never
dry up; bathing in small streams which dry up being
forbidden;—‘*devakhāta*’ is that which is known as ‘dug by the
gods’;—‘*taḍāga*’ is an artificial water-reservoir, which is larger than
1,000 square yards;—while ‘*Saras*’ is smaller than the ‘*Taḍāga*’ but
larger than 500 square yards; such is the explanation given by Hemādri.
According to *Kalpataru* on the other hand, the ‘*devakhāta taḍāga*’ is
such tank as is known to be connected with gods, at the *Puṣkara* lake
(near Ajmer), and the ‘*Saras*’ is a small stream;—the ‘*Garta*’ is that
which has been defined as running upto 2,004 yards;—and ‘*Prasravaṇa*’
is the water-fall.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 867), which has the following
notes:—‘*Nadī*’ means a flowing current of water which never dries up
completely, bathing in streams that dry up during summer being
forbidden—‘*devakhāta*’, such ditches and pools as are known to have
been ‘dug by the gods’,—‘*taḍāga*’, an artificial, water-reservoir which
is over 1,000 and less than 2,000 cubits in size; and ‘*Saraḥ*’ is a
tank which is over 1,000 cubits in size but smaller than a *Taḍāga*;
‘*Garta*’ is the name given to that reservoir of water whence water does
not flow out, and which covers ground 8,000 ‘bow-lengths’ in size; and
‘*Prasravaṇa*’ is the *water-fall*, water flowing down a mountain-side.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (64.16).—‘He shall bathe in springs, in ponds dug by the gods
and in lakes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.159).—‘He shall bathe in rivers, in ponds dug by the
gods and in springs.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Aparārka, p. 235).—‘Than water pulled out of the well, the
water on the ground is more sacred; and more so is the water of a
waterfall; better than that is lake-water; purer than that is
river-water; purer than that is the water of a Tīrtha; and the water of
the Gaṅgā is the most sacred of all.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Do.).—‘When a larger water is available one shall not
bathe in the smaller one; nor in an artificial one, where there is a
river.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

203	Let him always bathe in rivers, in ponds, dug by the gods (themselves), in lakes, and in waterholes or springs.
</details>
