+++
title = "205 नाऽश्रोत्रिय-तते यज्ञे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa shall never eat at a sacrifice performed by one who has not learnt the Veda; or at one performed by a village-priest, or at one offered by a woman or a eunuch.—(205).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तत्र भोजनम् एव तावद् अर्थित्वाद् यत्र कुत्रचित् प्राप्तं निषिध्यते । **अश्रोत्रियो** ऽनधीयानस् तेन **तते** प्रारब्धे **यज्ञ** ऋत्विग्भिर् वाश्रोत्रियैस् **तते** **न भुञ्जीत ब्राह्मणः** । **ग्रामयाजी** ग्रामयाजकस् तेन यत्र हूयते, यत्र च **स्त्री** होमं करोति । छान्दोग्ये हि स्त्रीणां गृह्यस्मृतिकारैर् अग्निहोत्रहोम उक्तो ऽतस् तं पश्यन् प्रतिषेधति । 

- अथ वा यत्र यज्ञे स्त्री प्रधानं भर्ता दारिद्र्यादिदोषैर् उपहतः स्त्री च सौदायिकेन धनेन ज्ञातिबलेन च दर्पिता तत्रायं प्रतिषेधः । 

- **क्लीबो** नपुंसकम् ॥ ४.२०५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has closed the section on Positive Duties; now
begins the section on prohibitions (Negative Duties).

Among the various acts it is that of eating which is likely to be done
at random,—food being what is sought after most; hence the text proceeds
with prohibitions regarding the act of eating.

‘*Aśrotriya*,’ ‘*Non-śrotriya*,’ is *one who has not learnt the Veda*;
at the sacrifice ‘*performed*’—undertaken—by him,—or at sacrifice at
which the officiating priests are ignorant of the *Veda*—‘*the Brāhmaṇa
shall not eat*.’

‘*Village-priest*,’—one who officiates as the priest of the entire
village; where such a person, or a woman, offers the sacrifice.

In the *Chāndogya*, the authors of the *Gṛhya* -rules have described the
performance of sacrifices by women, and it is in view of this that the
text forbids eating at such sacrifices. Or, the prohibition may refer to
that sacrifice at which the woman is the principal performer; her
husband being beset with poverty and other disqualifications, and the
woman being proud of the wealth acquired by her as dowry, or of the
wealth possessed by her relations.

‘*Eunuch*’— wanting in masculinity.—(205)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
944);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 494), which explains
‘*aśrotriyatate*’ as ‘that which is performed by such priests or
sacrifices as are devoid of Vedic learning’; this prohibition must mean
that one should not eat at such a sacrifice, even *after
Agniṣomīya-Vapāyāga*; as regards the time before this, eating at a
sacrifice is already forbidden by the general rule that ‘one should not
eat the food belonging to one who has been initiated for a sacrificial
performance’;—‘*grāmayājin*’ is one who performs sacrifices for groups
of men; and one should not eat at a sacrifice where such a priest makes
the offerings;—nor should one eat at a house where *Vaiśvadeva* and
other offerings have been made by a woman; this must be taken as
applying to cases where such priests are available, for where they are
not available, even women fire permitted to make the
offerings;—‘*klība*’ is ‘impotent’.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 770);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 259), which adds the following notes—‘*aśrotrīya*’, one who has not
learnt the Veda,—‘*grāmayājī*’, one who officiates as priest at the
Śrāddha and other performances by several persons, or performs
propitiatory rites for others; one should not go to a sacrifice where
such a man happens to be the *Hotṛ*, priest.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.11).—‘He shall keep away from honour at the hands of
unequals.’

*Āpastamba* (1.19.27).—‘The eunuch also.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.14).—‘He shall not take part in ceremonies performed by
one who serves as the priest of many persons, or by one who initiates
many persons.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

205	A Brahmana must never eat (a dinner given) at a sacrifice that is offered by one who is not a Srotriya, by one who sacrifices for a multitude of men, by a woman, or by a eunuch.
</details>
