+++
title = "209 गवा चाऽन्नम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Nor the food that has been smelt by the cow, nor particularly that food which has been publicly offered, nor the food that belongs to a multitude, nor the food of the harlot, nor that which has been censured by the learned.—(209)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**घुष्टान्नं** यद् उद्घुष्य दीयते ऽनामन्त्रिताय कस्मैचिद् अर्थिने मठसत्रभक्तादिविशेषानुद्देशेन । यद् वान्यस्मै प्रतिश्रुत्यान्यस्मै दीयते । प्रतिपत्तिज्ञाने ह्य् अयं धतुः पठ्यते । तदभावे बाधितं स्मरन्ति यज्ञविवाहादिष्व् अनामन्त्रितभोजनम् । 

- अयं च गणः संघातस्[^२६३] तस्माद् भ्रातॄणां त्व् अविभक्तानां न गणव्यपदेशः । "भ्रातॄणाम् अविभक्तानाम् एको धर्मः प्रवर्तते" (च्ड़्। म्ध् ९.२१५) इति वचनाद् एकश् च धर्मस् तेषाम् आतिथ्यादिक्रियैवेति नवमे दर्शितम्- "ज्येष्ठ एव तु गृह्णीयात् पित्र्यं धनम् अशेषतः" (म्ध् ९.१०५) इति । तस्य च ग्रहणम् अवश्यकर्तव्येष्व् अधिकार इति दर्सयति । साधारणस्यापि अन्यस्यातन्मध्यगतस्य प्रतिषेधः । **गणिका** वेश्या । **जुगुप्सितं** निन्दितम् । **विदुषा** वेदार्थविदा । भक्ष्यम् अपि बिसखल्यादि ॥ ४.२०९ ॥


[^२६३]:
     M G: gaṇasaṃghātas
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Food publicly offered*,’—the food that is given at temples or
sacrificial sessions, by public notice, to all coiners, without any
invitation to individuals. Or, it may mean ‘what is given to one person
after having been promised to another.’

The root, ‘*Ghuṣ*’ has been declared to mean *to announce*; so that
people regard the present verse as refering to cases where there is no
announcement; and what is forbidden, therefore, is eating, *without
invitation*, at sacrifices, marriages and such other functions.

The ‘*gaṇa*,’ meant by the text is *multitude*, *company*; hence the
name is not applied to a number of brothers living together undivided.
It is declared in Discourse IX that ‘there is a single duty operating
among brothers living jointly’; and the duty therein referred to is the
*receiving of guests*, and so forth; all which is made clear under
9.105, where the ‘eldest brother’ is declared as inheriting the entire
parental property; and it is this inheritance that indicates his
liability to fulfil the duties also.

What is forbidden is what is not induced in the parental heritage, even
though it belong in common to all.

‘*Harlot*’ is the public woman.

‘*Censured*’— deprecated,—‘*by the learned*’,—even though it be
something edible; *e.g*., the lotus-stalk, the oil-cake, and so
forth.—(209)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The second half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290).

The verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 451), which explains
‘*ghuṣṭānnam*’ as ‘the food that is offered at sacrificial sessions and
other similar occasions, to all and sundry by public proclamation’;—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 495), which explains ‘*ghuṣṭānna*’ in the
same manner as *Smṛtitattva*, but quotes Medhātithi’s second alternative
explanation of it as ‘what had been previously promised to another
person’; ‘*viśeṣataḥ*’ has been added with a view to indicate the
exceptional objectionability of the food;—‘*gaṇa*’ is ‘multitude,’—this
term is not applicable to brothers who have not separated;—‘*gaṇikā*’ is
a ‘prostitute’;—‘what has been condemned by a disinterested person
learned in the Veda, even without his detecting any of the specified
defects.’

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 510 and 771);—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 260), which adds the following notes:
—‘*Ghuṣṭānnam*’, that food which is offered publicly with such words as
‘who is there who will take this food?’,—‘*gaṇānnam*’ food cooked by
several persons jointly.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.11).—(See above.)

(Do.) (17. 15).—‘What has been touched by the unchaste woman, the
accused person, or one who is unknown, or one who is undergoing
punishment, or the carpenter, the miser, the physician, the fowler, one
who lives upon leavings,—of the multitude or of enemies.’

*Āpastamba* (17.5).—‘What has been smelt by men, or by other unclean
animals.’

(Do.) (18.16-17).—‘The food belonging to a multitude should not be
eaten, or what has been censured.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.4).—‘What has been publicly offered, or the food
belonging to a multitude or to a harlot.’

*Viṣṇu* (61.7, 9, 17).—‘The food belonging to a multitude or to a harlot
or to a thief or to a singer—if one eats this he should live for seven
days on milk only,—also the food belonging to a woman, a miser, one who
has been initiated for a sacrifice, one who is accused of a crime, or
the eunuch. What has been seen by the abortionist, or touched by the
woman in her courses, or pecked by birds, or touched by the dog or smelt
by the cow.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.168).—(See above.)

(Do.) (1.161.).—‘Food belonging to a miser, a prisoner, a thief, a
eunuch, an actor, a dealer in bamboos, one accused of a crime, an
usurer, a harlot, a multitude, or the person initiated for a sacrifice.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

209	Nor food at which a cow has smelt, nor particularly that which has been offered by an invitation to all comers, nor that (given) by a multitude or by harlots, nor that which is declared to be had by a learned (man),
</details>
