+++
title = "211 अभिशस्तस्य षण्ढस्य"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Nor the food of an accused person, or of the hermaphrodite, or the unchaste woman, or the hypocrite; nor the food turned sour, or that kept overnight, or what forms the leavings of the Śūdra.—(211)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पुंश्चली** यस्य कस्य्चिन् मैथुनसंबन्धेन घटते ।

- <u>ननु</u> च गणिकान्नं प्रतिषिद्धम् एव ।

- <u>नैतद्</u> एवम् । अन्या गणिका, अन्या पुंश्चली । गणिका वेश्यावेशेन जीवति । पुंश्चली त्व् इन्द्रियचपला । 

- **दाम्भिको** बैडालव्रतिकादिः सोपधो धर्मचरणः । प्रायश्चित्तविशेषार्थं **शूद्रोच्छिष्टं** प्रतिषिध्यते, सर्वस्यैवोच्छिष्टभोजनप्रतिषेधात् । <u>अन्ये</u> तु **शूद्रोच्छिष्टं** स्थालीस्थं भोज्यान्नं शूद्रभुक्तशिष्टम् उच्छिष्टम् उच्यत इत्य् आहुः । पाठान्तरं तु "उच्छिष्टम् अगुरोस् तथा" इति । उच्छिष्टम् उच्यते यत् परस्य स्पर्शनाद् अशुद्धं भुक्तोज्झितं च । आत्मीये ह्य् अभुक्तो ऽज्झित एकग्रासाशनम् एव स्यात् । न चैष शिष्टानां समाचारो यत् सकृदन्नं दत्तं भुक्त्वा पुनर् आचम्य पात्रान्तरे गृहीतं भुज्यते । तथा नाद्याद् अन्नम् । तथान्तरे ऽभ्युत्थानादिक्रियान्तरस्य प्रतिषेधः । अत आ तृप्तेः प्राग् आचमनात् पश्चात् स्पर्शे न दोषः । सहभोजनं तु सत्य् अपि परस्य स्पर्शे पदार्थान्तरत्वान् नोच्छिष्टभोजनम् । अत्र पित्रा पुत्रादिभिः शिष्टं सह भुज्यते । तथा चापस्तम्बादयो देशग्रहणात् प्रसङ्गेन "अनुपनीतेन सह भोजनम्"[^२६४] (च्ड़्। ब्ध् १.२.३) निन्दन्ति, नोपनीतेन । अस्मिंस् तु पक्षे विजातीयैः सह भोजनप्रतिषेधः । व्यवधानान्तरम् आश्रयणीयम् । भुक्तोज्झितं तु धात्वर्थयोगाद् उच्छिष्टम् अन्यदीयम् अपि ॥ ४.२११ ॥


[^२६४]:
     The ascription of this passage to Āpastamba is curious. It is from the well-known passage of Baudhāyana on the unique practices of the north and the south. Either Medh has made a mistake here, or the medieval editor for King Madana made a mistake here.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Unchaste woman*’—one who has sexual intercourse with any and every
person.

“The food of the harlot has been already forbidden \[so that the present
text would appear to be superfluous\].”

It is not so; the ‘unchaste woman’ is totally different from the
‘harlot.’ The ‘harlot’ is one that makes a living by her beauty; while
the ‘unchaste woman’ is one who is unstable in her sexual passions.

‘*Hypocrite*’—the ‘man of cat-like behaviour’ and others of similar bad
conduct.

‘*The Śūdra’s leavings*’ are specially forbidden here for the purpose of
indicating the heaviness of the expiatory panance necessitated by
it;—the partaking of the leavings of all men having been already
forbidden.

Others explain the terms, ‘*Śūdra’s leavings*,’ to mean the food *left
in the dish*, after the *Śūdra* has eaten out of it.

Another reading is ‘*ucchiṣṭamagurostathā*,’ ‘the leavings of persons
other than one’s teacher.’

As a matter of fact, the term ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ stands for that which has
been defiled by the touch of another person, as also for that which has
been left after another person has eaten. In the latter sense, if one’s
own ‘leavings’ were prohibited, then every one would have to cat the
whole of one’s food as a single morsel. Nor is it the custom among
cultured people that, after having eaten one morsel of food, the man
washes his hands and mouth and eats the next morsel out of another dish.
As for the prohibition that ‘one Should not cat the food once partaken
of,’ what this forbids is the interruption of the meal by such acts as
rising to receive a guest, and so forth, till one has had one’s fill and
till one has washed; after which the touch of others involves no harm.

Where several persons are dining together, even if they happen to touch
one another,—as this touching is something totally different,—it would
not be a case of ‘eating the leavings.’ As a matter of fact, the Father,
along with his sons, always partakes of the food *left* by guests.
Āpastamba and others have deprecated eating *with uninitiated sons*,—not
with the *initiated* ones.

According to this view, the prohibition would apply to eating in the
company of men of other castes; and, in all such cases, some intervening
screen shall he set up between the two persons. As for ‘leavings,’ in
the sense of what has been left after one has eaten,—this is forbidden,
whether it be one’s own ‘leavings’ or those of some other person,—(211).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Śūdrasyocchiṣṭam*’—‘Food of a Śūdra, and the leavings of any man’
(Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa);—‘the leavings of a Śūdra’ (Medhātithi,
Rāghavānanda, Govindarāja and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3. 290);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
451) which explains ‘*paryuṣitam*’ as ‘food kept overnight’, and
‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ as ‘leavings’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 495)
which adds the following notes:—‘*Abhiśasta*’ is ‘one accused of such
crimes as make one outcast,’—‘*ṣaṇḍaka*’ is
‘hermaphrodite,’—‘*puṃścalī*’ is ‘unchaste woman,’—‘*dāmbhika*’ is ‘the
religious hypocrite,’—‘*śukta*’ is that which has been very much soured
by the contact of the juice of other things,—‘*paryuṣita*’ is ‘food kept
over-night,’ even though not soured;—according to Haradatta, food cooked
during the day becomes ‘*paryuṣita*’ after sunset, and that cooked
during the night becomes so after sunrise;—one should not eat the
‘leavings’ of a Śūdra; though the eating of all ‘leavings’ has been
forbidden, yet that of the Śūdra has been specified for the purpose of
indicating that this is doubly objectionable;—or the meaning of the
clause ‘*śūdrasyocchiṣṭam*’ may be that ‘one should not eat a Śūdra’s
food, nor the leavings of any person’;—or ‘out of the dish out of which
a Śūdra has eaten and left some food.’

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 772);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 250) which explains ‘*ṣaṇḍaka*’ as ‘sexless’; and adds that of
‘*śaktu*’ and ‘*paryuṣita*’ food, only repeated eating involves
expiation.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17, 14-16).—‘Food kept overnight (should be avoided), with
the exception of vegetables, oils, meat and honey:—also the food of the
loose woman, the accused, etc., etc.,—of those unfit for company, except
the baldheaded.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.17-20).—‘Cooked food kept overnight,—food turned sour,
etc.’

(Do.) (1.18.13).—‘One may eat food offered by men of all castes, who are
devoted to their duties; except the Śūdra.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.2, 3, 16. 17, 28, 29).—‘The food offered by the following
shall not bo eaten—the physician,...... the loose woman, the accused,
the eunuch and the outcast;—the Śūdra, who wields weapons, the paramour,
one who permits the paramour in his house,—of the eunuch, the unchaste
woman, it is not accepted; no leavings except those of the teacher shall
be eaten; nor what has been defiled by the touch of leavings.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.9,10).—‘Of the usurer, the miser, the initiated, the
accused, the eunuch, the loose woman, the hypocrite, the physician, the
fowler, the cruel man, the *Ugra*, and those who live upon leavings.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.161).—(See above.)

(Do.) (1.162).—‘Of the physician, the invalid, the enraged, the loose
woman, the intoxicated, the enemy, the cruel man, the *Ugra*, the
outcast, the apostate, the hypocrite, and those who live on leavings.’

*Gobhila* (3.5.9,10).—‘Not what has been left overnight;—except
vegetables, meat and preparations of barley-flour.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

211	By one accused of a mortal sin (Abhisasta), a hermaphrodite, an unchaste woman, or a hypocrite, nor (any sweet thing) that has turned sour, nor what has been kept a whole night, nor (the food) of a Sudra, nor the leavings (of another man),
</details>
