+++
title = "212 चिकित्सकस्य मृगयोः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Nor the food of this physician, or of the hunter, or of a cruel person, or of one who lives on leavings; nor the food of the “Ugra;” nor what has been cooked for the newly-delivered woman, until ten days have passed; nor that which has been interrupted by washing.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

स्मृत्यन्तरे विशेषः श्रूयते- "शल्या नर्तकजीविनः"[^२६५] । **मृगयुर्** मृगव्याधः । आखेटकार्थं मांसविक्रयार्थं वा यो मृगान् हन्ति । **क्रूर** अनृजुप्रकृतिः दुष्प्रसादः । **उच्छिष्टभोजी** निषिद्धोच्छिष्टभोजी । **उग्रो** जातिविशेषः । राजेत्य् एतस्य वेदे प्रयोगो दृश्यते । "उग्रो मध्यमशीरिव" (र्व् १०.९७.१२) इति । न च तस्यान्यः प्रतिषेधो ऽस्ति, दोषप्रदर्शनप्रकारेण च न श्रूयते "राजान्नं तेज आदत्ते" (म्ध् ४.२१८) इत्य् अर्थवादाच् च प्रतिषेधः ।


[^२६५]:
     This sentence is omitted in Jha's translation. This abrupt beginning of the commentary is curious; possibly there is a missing passage here that dealt with cikitsaka, prior to the citation of this smṛtyantara.

- **सूतिकान्नं** सूतिकाम् उद्दिश्य यत् कृतं तत्कुलीनैर् अपि तद् अभोज्यम् । तद् अनाद्यम् **अनिर्दशं** दशाहानि यावत् । तेन यद्य् अपि क्षत्रियादीनां दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वम् आशौचं तथापि दशाहानि न भोज्यम् । पाठान्तरं "सूतकान्नम्" इति । सूतकशब्देन च तद्वन्तः पुरुषा लक्ष्यन्ते । येषां कुले सूतकं ते दशाहं न भोज्यान्ना इति । यस्मिन् पक्षे सर्वेषां दशाहं सूतकाशौचं तत्रायं प्रतिषेधः । यदा तु मातापित्रोः सूतकं मातुर् वेति पक्षस् तदा यावद् आशौचं न भोज्यम् । **अनिर्दश**ग्रहणम् आशौचनिवृत्त्युपलक्षणार्थम् । तेन क्षत्रियादीनां यस्य यावद् आशौचकालः स तावत्कालम् अभोज्यान्नः । "सूतकान्नम् अनिर्दशम्" इति पठितव्ये वृत्तानुरोधात् पर्याचान्तपदेन व्यवधानम् ।

- <u>अन्यैस्</u> तु स्वतन्त्रम् **अनिर्दश**ग्रहणं व्याख्यातम् । **सूतक**शब्देन आशौचकालो ऽनुद्योत्यते । **अनिर्दशं** गवादीनां पयः । पर्याचान्तं शौचाचमनव्यपेतम् अर्धभुक्ते केनचित् कारणेन यद्य् आचामति तदा पुनर् भुक्तोज्झितं नाशितव्यम् ॥ ४.२१२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Hunter*,’—the professional hunter of animals; one who kills animals
for purposes of hunting, or for the purpose of selling their flesh.

‘*Cruel*,’—whose nature is not straightforward, who is difficult to
please.

‘*One who lives on leavings*,’—*i.e*., one who eats such leavings as
have been forbidden.

‘*Ugra*’—is the name of a special sub-caste. In the Veda, the term is
applied to a kind of king, one who forms the central link in the chain
of the king’s alliance. There is no other prohibition regarding such a
king; it is only in course of showing the evils arising from eating the
food of such kings that we rend—‘the food given by kings deprives one of
one’s energy,’ from which some sort of prohibition may be inferred.
\[For all these reasons, the term ‘*Ugra*’ in the text must be taken to
stand for a particular mixed caste, and not for the *king* \].

‘*Sūtikānnam*’ is food prepared for the woman in childbed; and this
should not be eaten even by men of her own family.

This food is to be avoided ‘*until, ten days have passed*.’ Though, in
the case of the Kṣatriya and other castes, the period of impurity lasts
longer than ten days, yet the food is to be avoided for ten days only.

Another reading is ‘*sūtakānnam*;’ and the term ‘*sūtaka*,’ ‘impurity,’
due to child-birth, in this case, would indicate the *persons* under
that impurity; the meaning being that ‘one should not eat for ten days
the food offered by persons, in whose family there is impurity due to
child-birth.’ This prohibition applies to those cases in which, for all
persons, the period of impurity due to child-birth extends over ten
days. But if the view be taken that impurity due to childbirth applies
to the parents only, or to the mother only,—then food is to be avoided
as long as the period of impurity may last in each particular case;—the
term ‘*until ten days have passed*’ being indicative of the ‘period of
impurity.’ Thus *Kṣattñyas* and others would have their food avoided
during such time as the period of impurity may last in each individual
case.

‘*Sūtikānnamanirdaśam*’ being the right form of the expression, the term
‘*paryācāntam*,’ ‘*that which has been interrupted by washing*,’ has
been made to intervene (between the words, ‘*sūtikānnam*’ and
‘*anirdaśam*’) by considerations of metrical exegencies.

Others have taken ‘*anirdaśam*’ separately, by itself (and not as
qualifying ‘*sūtakānnam*’). Under this, the term ‘*sūtaka*’ would
indicate the period of impurity, and ‘*anirdaśam*’ would stand for the
milk of the cow and other animals (within ten days of their calving).

‘*Interrupted by washing*’— in course of which rinsing and washing have
been done. If, for some reason, the person washes his hand, then he
should not eat of the food left in the dish.—(212)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ugra*’—‘A man of the *Ugra* caste’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa
and Nandana)—‘a king’ (suggested by Medhātithi, and Govindarāja);—‘one
who perpetrates dreadful deeds’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
451), which adds the following notes:—The food that has been cooked for
the newly-delivered woman should not he eaten by members of her
family;—‘*paryācānta*’—when several men are eating in a line, if any one
of them happen to rinse his mouth, the others should not continue to
eat;—‘*anirdaśam*’ is the food of a man who has not got rid of the
impurity due to child-birth.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 945);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 495), which adds—‘*chikitsaka*’ is ‘one who makes a living
by administering medicine’;—‘*mṛgayu*’ is one who kills animals by means
other than arrows, *i.e*., by means of traps and such
contrivances;—‘*Krūra*’ is the man who harbours within him much anger,
*i.e*., ill-tempered;—‘*ucchiṣṭabhojī*’—who eats such leavings as are
forbidden;—‘*ugra*’ is one who does cruel deeds, or one who is *born of
a Kṣatriya father and* Vaiśya mother, or a king;—‘*Sūtikānnam*’—the food
that has been cooked for a newly-delivered woman should not be eaten
even by members of her own family;—‘*paryācāntam*,’—when several men are
eating in a line, if some one should ignore the presence of others and
rinse his mouth, then the food before the others becomes ‘*paryācānta*’;
but there is no harm if the person rinsing his mouth happen to be one’s
‘elder’;—or ‘*paryācānta*’ may be explained as that food over which the
water of mouth-washing has been thrown;—‘*anirdaśam*’ is the food of a
person still impure by reason of child-birth.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 772);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 200) which has the following notes:—‘*sūtikānnam*’, food cooked for
a woman newly delivered; ‘within ten days of the delivery’
(‘*anirdaśam*’), according to the commentator who says that
‘*anirdaśam*’ qualifies ‘*sūtikānnam*’;—‘*paryācāntam*’, which is in
close proximity to the water dropped in rinsing the mouth.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (17.15).—(See above.)

(Do.) (17. 20).—‘The milk of the cow before the lapse of ten days since
her calving.’

*Āpastamba* (1.19.14-16).—(See above.)

(Do.) (1. 16. 18).—‘When any one dies in a family, one should not eat
there until ten days have passed.’ *Āpastamba* (1.18.21).—‘The
physician.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.10).—‘The food of the loose woman, the hypocrite, the
physician, the fowler, the cruel man, and those who live upon leavings.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.162).—(See above.)

*Mahābhārata* (Śānti, 35.30)—‘The food of the physician, of the guard,
of the multitude, of people accused of crimes, and of those who make a
living by acting or by women.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	Nor (the food given) by a physician, a hunter, a cruel man, one who eats the fragments (of another's meal), nor the food of an Ugra, nor that prepared for a woman in childbed, nor that (given at a dinner) where (a guest rises) prematurely (and) sips water, nor that (given by a woman) whose ten days of impurity have not elapsed,
</details>
