+++
title = "217 मृष्यन्ति ये"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Nor of thos e who bear the presence of the paramour, or of those who are entirely ruled b y women; nor the food of those in whose house death has occurred and the ten days have not passed; nor that which is disagree able.—(217)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वो ऽविदितभार्याजारः । अयं तु विदित्वा क्षमते न भार्याया निग्रहं करोति । नापि तस्य अविदुषो ऽन्यत्र गृहाज् जारिणो भोज्यान्नं नैव[^२६८] । स्त्रीजिताः येषां भार्यैव गृहे कर्त्री हर्त्री च स्वयं परिजनस्य[^२६९] च नेशस् तेन सर्वत्र तद्वशवर्तिनः । **प्रेतान्नं** मरणाशौचे तत्कुलीना अभोज्यान्नाः । **अनिर्दश**ग्रहणं कालोपलक्षणार्थम् । यदानिर्दशग्रहणं पूर्वत्र स्वतन्त्रम् आशौचसंबन्धिनाम् अविशेषेणान्नं प्रतिषेधति तद् इह प्रेतान्नकृतं[^२७०] यस्याप्य् आशौचं नास्ति सुहृद्बान्धवादेः । कारुण्याच् चतुर्थीश्राद्धादिप्रवृत्तस्य यद् अन्नं तन् न भोज्यम् । "दशाहिकं नावमिकं चतुर्थीश्राद्दम् अष्टमी" इत्यादि रामायणे वर्णितम् अन्यैर् अपि गृह्यकारैः । **अतुष्टिकरं** यस्मिन् भुज्यमाने चित्ततुष्टिर् न भवेत् ॥ ४.२१७ ॥


[^२७०]:
     M G 1st ed.: pretānnaṃ kṛtaṃ


[^२६९]:
     M G 1st ed.: parijanyasya


[^२६८]:
     M G: naivaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The man mentioned in the preceding verse is one who does not know of the
presence of his wife’s paramour; while the one mentioned here is one who
knows it, and suffers it, and does not check his wife. If the man does
not know of the presence of the paramour, who comes from another house,
then the food given by such a man is not forbidden.

‘*Who are ruled by women*,’—those persons in whose house the wife is the
sole mistress and dispenser; and who are not master of themselves or of
their dependants; who are entirely under the control of their wives.

‘*Pretānnam*;’—when one is impure, on account of death in his house, the
food belonging to the members of his family is forbidden.—‘*Ten days
have not passed*;’—this indicates the period of time.

If the term, ‘*anirdaśam*’ (of verse 212), is to be taken by itself, as
forbidding the food belonging to ‘impure’ persons, then ‘the food
belonging to persons in whose house there has been death’ being already
included there, the present term would stand for the food of those
persons who are directly connected with the impurity; such persons, for
instance, as the friends and maternal relations of the dead. Similarly,
one shall not eat the food belonging to one who may be engaged in the
performance of such rites as the

‘*Caturthī-Śrāddha*,’ and the like, which is undertaken through sympathy
with the person in whose house the death has occurred. Such *śrāddhas*
have been mentioned by the Authors of *Gṛhyasūtras*, as also in the
*Rāmāyaṇa*, in such passages as—‘The *tenth-day Śrāddha*, the *Ninth-day
Śrāddha*, the *Eighth-day Śrāddha*, the *Fourth-day Śrāddha*, etc.’

‘*What is disagreeable*;’—by eating which one does not feel happy.—(217)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.190) in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
945);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 496), which adds that one
should not eat the food of a person who brooks the presence of a
paramour in his house, as also of one who, *in all things* (*sarvaśaḥ*)
is under the sway of women,—‘*anirdaśam pretānnam*’ is that food which
has been offered to the dead within ten days of the
death,—‘*atuṣṭikaram*’ is that food the taste of which is not
agreeable;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 774);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 261).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (Śānti., 35.26, 28).—‘The food belonging to a house where
there has been a death or a birth,—until ten days have passed;—those who
permit their wife’s paramour, and those who are controlled by their
wives.’

*Gautama* (17.18).—(See above.)

*Āpastamba* (1.16.18).—‘In a family where there has been a death,—no
food should he eaten until ten days have passed.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.6).—‘The gods do not eat the food belonging to one who is
controlled by his wife, or one who permits his wife’s paramour in the
house.'

*Yājñavalkya* (1.163).—(See above.)

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 499).—‘The following are persons whose
food should not be eaten:—Actor, dancer, carpenter, cobbler, goldsmith,
a brotherless woman, eunuch, prostitute, singer, ironsmith, butcher,
weaver, cloth-dealer, dyer, gambler, thief, wine-seller, weigher,
Śūdra’s teacher, Śūdra’s sacrificer, potter, painter, usurer, and
leather-seller.’

*Sumanta* (Do.).—‘The accused, outcast, son of a remarried widow,
embryo-killer, harlot, weapon-maker, oil-presser, wine-seller,
goldsmith, writer, eunuch, loose woman, astrologer, prostitute,—the food
of these should not be eaten. The hog-dealer, fowler, vagabond, dyer,
stage-maker, bamboo-dealer, cobbler,—of these, the food should not bo
eaten, nor gifts accepted.
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

217	Nor (the food given) by those who knowingly bear with paramours (of their wives), and by those who in all matters are ruled by women, nor food (given by men) whose ten days of impurity on account of a death have not passed, nor that which is unpalatable.
</details>
