+++
title = "03 क्षेत्रज्ञञ् चापि"

+++
13.2-3 Somewhere in the scriputures it is heard that 'The
Field-sensitizer must be worshipped'. Is He the same as the Soul, or the
Lord or an altogether different third entity ; On a doubt regarding this
problem - The Bhagavat instructs-Idam etc. Ksetrajnam etc. For persons
of wordly life their body is the Ksetra 'Field' where the seeds of
action grow. That is why their personal Soul covered with incoming (or
foreign, not-natural) dirt, is called Field-sensitizer. In the case of
the enlightened persons, the self-same body is \[again\] the Ksetra, But
there is difference in etimological meaning viz : It decays the fetters
of the result of action by means of consuming \[it\]; and it protects
\[them\] from the fear of birth-and-death \[cycle\]. With reference to
these persons, the Supreme Soul, Vasudeva is the Field-sensitizer. He
who sensitizes this Field : He who causes it to know. Here the root vid
includes within itself, the meaning of the causal suffix ni. Therefore
\[the meaning is :\] He, on account of Whose grace this insentient
\[body\] attains the status of being sentient, He alone, an no one else,
is the Field-sensitizer. But, the \[only\] difference is this : Taking
into consideration th aspect of limited pervaisveness, He is taken to be
Soul; and on account of \[His\] unlimited pervasiveness in all the
Fields, \[He is called\] the Supreme Soul, the Bhagavat Vasudeva. Of Me
: the Sixth Case here is in the objective sense. Hence the idea is : I
may be known by means of this knowledge.
