+++
title = "+135"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘यस्मिन्' इति सप्तर्चं सप्तमं सूक्तं यमगोत्रस्य कुमारस्यार्षमानुष्टुभं यमदेवत्यम्। तथा चानुक्रान्तं- यस्मिन् कुमारो यामायनो याममानुष्टुभं तु ' इति ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

135 (961)  
Yama  
Kumāra Yāmāyana  
7 verses: anuṣṭubh  
Both baffling and deeply engrossing, this hymn has given rise to a multitude  of interpretations, none of which produces a completely satisfactory reading.  Without discussing previous interpretations in detail, we will add our own,  with no expectation that it will meet with any more acceptance than those that  preceded it.  
It is generally (but not universally) agreed that it concerns a death, either that of  a boy or that of his father, and the journey to (or from) the realm of Yama, the ruler  of the dead (see, e.g., X.14). Both a boy (kumārá, vss. 3–5) and a father (vs. 1) are  explicitly mentioned in the hymn, and we follow those who consider the dead man  to be the father. The pleasant place over which Yama has domain is described in the  first and last (7) verses; in the first verse the dead person is traveling there, while in  the last he seems to have reached it successfully.  
The first two verses appear to be spoken by the boy whose father has just died.  He imagines his father’s journey to Yama (vs. 1), and in verse 2 he displays a psy chologically plausible ambivalence: he longs to see his father again, but recoils from  even the thought of following him on his road to the realm of the dead. The solu tion to his psychological dilemma seems to be given in verses 3–4: the boy creates a mental chariot without wheels that he mounts without seeing it, and presum ably this vehicle carries him to his father without the rigors of the journey. To us  this mental conveyance suggests a dream, and many of us have experienced such  reunions with the beloved dead in dreams. But the chariot can also be (and in vs. 4  more likely is) the ritual, quite possibly the correctly performed funeral service for  his father.  
The real problems in this hymn are found in verses 5–6 and in particular the  word anudéyī, found in both verses (5d, 6a) in identical phrases. Although the  word is a transparent gerundive, in the feminine, formed to the lexeme ánu-√dā “hand over, concede” and should therefore mean “to be handed over, conceded,”  its exact usage is completely unclear. Its only other occurrence is in the wedding  hymn (X.85.6), where it appears to refer to a bridesmaid or female servant of the  bride, who is to accompany her to her new home. Interpretations of the word in  this hymn vary wildly, an indication of the problems it poses: Grassmann “Braut”  (bride); Geldner “Amme” (nurse); Renou “viatique” (provisions for a journey;  EVP), but “chargement” (cargo; Hymnes spéculatives [1956]); Oldenberg (following  Caland) “Anustaraṇīkuh” (cow to be killed at the funeral rite); Griffith “funeral  gift”; Macdonell “equipment”; Doniger O’Flaherty “gift for the journey.” Our own  interpretation is informed by the use of the lexeme ánu-√dā in an Atharvaveda pas sage (AVŚ VI.118.1–2), a passage found in various versions also in the Paippalāda  recension of the Atharvaveda, in the Maitrāyaṇa Saṃhitā, and in the Taittirīya  Āraṇyaka. In this passage the speaker asks for his offenses, his debts (r̥ṇá), to be  forgiven, using the verb ánu-dā (vs. 1: “let the two Apsarases forgive this r̥ṇá of  ours today”), and he seeks for this to happen before he enters “Yama’s world.” The  part of the passage concerning Yama’s world is read variously in the various texts  and has clearly been subject to corruption, but in most readings the person in ques tion fears entering Yama’s world “with a rope on” (ádhirajju), a rope presumably  imposed by his debts.  
Reading our passage with these passages in mind, we may speculate that verses  5 and 6 find the father arriving at Yama’s world with the same anxiety apparent in  the passages just referred to: that he will be called to account for the debts he owes  and must prove that they have been repaid or forgiven (ánu-√dā) before he enters  that realm. The Taittirīya Saṃhitā (VI.3.10.5) already knows the three debts (also  r̥ṇá) with which a brahmin is born: studentship to the r̥ṣis, sacrifice to the gods, and  sons for his ancestors. Although we see no trace of studentship in this hymn, the  two questions in the first half of verse 5 provide implicit answers about the other  two debts: the dead man begat a son, and he (and/or the son) also sent forth the  chariot of sacrifice. Satisfactory answers about these debts clear the way for the  father to enter Yama’s realm in verse 6, and it may in fact be Yama who is asking  the questions.  
Several questions remain, however. Since r̥ṇá “debt” is a neuter noun, why is  ánudeyī feminine in gender? There are no obvious feminine referents in this hymn  that could underlie this adjective. For this problem the Atharvaveda passage  

provides a clue. As was noted above, the protagonist in that passage fears entering  Yama’s world “with a rope on,” with the rope representing his unpaid debts. The  word rájju “rope” is feminine, and we suggest that this symbolic representation is  the referent of ánudeyī. A more literal rendering than that given in the translation  below would be “(the rope/fetter of debt) to be forgiven.”  
Even in this interpretation verse 6 remains somewhat puzzling, though the over all impression made by the last three pādas is that of the enlargement of space.  Here the clue is found in the final pāda, in the word niráyaṇam “coming forth.” The  lexeme nír-√i (and closely related nír-ā́-√i) is almost entirely confined in the R̥gveda  to birth contexts, to “coming forth” from the womb or a womblike container. In  X.60.7 it is used not of an original birth, but of a symbolic rebirth, recalling a  sick man to life. We suggest that here, too, a rebirth is at issue, but this time it is  the rebirth into a happy life in Yama’s world, where the dead man will be reunited  with his body and partake of the pleasures hinted at in verses 1 and 7, as well as  in, for example, X.14 (esp. vss. 7–9). The reuniting with the body after death in a  distant realm is treated at length in X.56, where it is also likened to birth (X.56.1).  The rebirth in our verse is somewhat graphically depicted, with the top (the head  of the infant) coming out first, then the rest of his body, until the coming forth is  completed. (Or, alternatively, the nirayaṇam may actually refer to the afterbirth.)  
The last verse announces the dead and now reborn man’s arrival at Yama’s  delightful seat, with the emphatic annunciatory pronouns idám (7a), iyám (7c),  ayám (7d), all meaning “here is, this one right here.” The promise of verse 1 has  finally been fulfilled.  
For a detailed presentation of this interpretation of X.135, see Jamison  (forthcoming d).
</details>

<details><summary>Geldner</summary>

Der Sohn:
</details>
