+++
title = "10 तमुवाच हृषीकेशः"

+++
2.10 And here, the text commencing from 'But seeing the army of the
Pandavas' (1.2) and ending with '(he) verily became silent, telling Him
(Govinda), "I shall not fight"' is to be explained as revealing the
cause of the origin of the defect in the from of sorrow, delusion, etc.
\[Delusion means want of discrimination. Etc. stands for the secondary
manifestations of sorrow and delusion, as also ignorance which is the
root cause of all these.\] which are the sources of the cycles of births
and deaths of creatures. Thus indeed, Ajuna's own sorrow and delusion,
cuased by the ideas of affection, parting, etc., originating from the
erroneous belief, 'I belong to these; they belong to me', with regard to
kingdom \[See note under verse 8.-Tr.\], elders, sons, comrades,
well-wishers (1.26), kinsmen (1.37), relatives (1.34) and friends, have
been shown by him with the words, 'How can I (fight)৷৷.in battle
(against) Bhisma' (4), etc. It is verily because his discriminating
insight was overwhelmed by sorrow and delusion that, even though he had
become engaged in battle out of his own accord as a duty of the
Ksatriyas, he desisted from that war and chose to undertake other's
duties like living on alms etc. It is thus that in the case of all
creatures whose minds come under the sway of the defects of sorrow,
delusion, etc. there verily follows, as a matter of course, abandoning
their own duties and resorting to prohibited ones. Even when they engage
in their own duties their actions with speech, mind, body, etc., are
certainly motivated by hankering for rewards, and are accompanied by
egoism. \[Egoism consists in thinking that one is the agent of some work
and the enjoyer of its reward.\] Such being the case, the cycle of
births and deaths characterized by passing through desireable and
undesirable births, and meeting with happiness, sorrow, etc. \[From
virtuous deeds follow attainment of heaven and happiness. From
unvirtuous, sinful deeds follow births as beasts and other lowly beings,
and sorrow. From the performance of both virtuous and sinful deeds
follows birth as a human being, with a mixture of happiness and
sorrow.\] from the accumulation of virtue and vice, continues
unendingly. Thus, sorrow and delusion are therefore the sources of the
cycles of births and deaths. And their cessation comes from nothing
other than the knowledge of the Self which is preceded by the
renunciation of all duties. Hence, wishing to impart that (knowledge of
the Self) for favouring the whole world, Lord Vasudeva, making Arjuna
the medium, said, 'You grieve for those who are not to be grieved for,'
etc. As to that some (opponents) \[According to A.G. the opponent is the
Vrttikara who, in the opinion of A. Mahadeva Sastri, is none other than
Bodhayana referred to in Sankaracarya's commentary on B.S.
1.1.11-19.-Tr.\] say: Certainly, Liberation cannot be attained merely
from continuance in the knowledge of the Self which is preceded by
renunciation of all duties and is independent of any other factor. What
then; The well-ascertained conclusion of the whole of the Gita is that
Liberation is attained through Knowledge associated with rites and
duties like Agnihotra etc. prescribed in the Vedas and the Smrtis. And
as an indication of this point of view they ote (the verses): 'On the
other hand, if you will not fight this righteous (battle)' (33); 'Your
right is for action (rites and duties) alone' (47); 'Therefore you
undertake action (rites and duties) itself' (4.15), etc. Even this
objection should not be raised that Vedic rites and duties lead to sin
since they involve injury etc.'. Objection: How; Opponent: The duties of
the Ksatriyas, charaterized by war, do not lead to sin when undertaken
as one's duty, even though they are extremely cruel since they involve
violence against elders, brothers, sons and others. And from the Lord's
declaration that when they are not performed, 'then, forsaking your own
duty and fame, you will incur sin' (33), it stands out as (His) clearly
stated foregone conclusion that one's own duties prescribed in such
texts as, '(One shall perform Agnihotra) as long as one lives' etc., and
actions which involve crutely to animals etc. are not sinful. Vedantin:
That is wrong because of the assertion of the distinction between firm
adherence (nistha) to Knowledge and to action, which are based on two
(different) convictions (buddhi). The nature of the Self, the supreme
Reality, determined by the Lord in the text beginning with 'Those who
are not to be grieved for' (11) and running to the end of the verse,
'Even considering your own duty' (31), is called Sankhya. Sankhya-buddhi
\[Sankhya is that correct (samyak) knowledge of the Vedas which reveals
(khyayate) the reality of the Self, the supreme Goal. The Reality under
discussion, which is related to this sankhya by way of having been
revealed by it, is Sankhya.\] (Conviction about the Reality) is the
conviction with regard to That (supreme Reality) arising from the
ascertainment of the meaning of the context \[Ascertainment৷৷.of the
context, i.e., of the meaning of the verses starting from, 'Never is
this One born, and never does It die,' etc. (20).\] that the Self is not
an agent because of the absence in It of the six kinds of changes, viz
birth etc. \[Birth, continuance, growth, transformation, decay and
death.\] Sankhyas are those men of Knowledge to whom that (conviction)
becomes natural. Prior to the rise of this Conviction (Sankhya-buddhi),
the ascertained \[Ast. and A.G. omit this word 'ascertainment,
nirupana'-Tr.\] of the performance of the disciplines leading to
Liberation which is based on a discrimination between virtue and vice,
\[And adoration of God\]. and which presupposes the Self's difference
from the body etc. and Its agentship and enjoyership is called Yoga. The
conviction with regard to that (Yoga) is Yoga-buddhi. The performers of
rites and duties, for whom this (conviction) is appropriate, are called
yogis. Accordingly, the two distinct Convictions have been pointed out
by the Lord in the verse, 'This wisdom (buddhi) has been imparted to you
from the standpoint of Self-realization (Sankhya). But listen to this
(wisdom) from the standpoint of (Karma-) yoga' (39). And of these two,
the Lord will separately speak, with reference to the Sankhyas, of the
firm adherence to the Yoga of Knowledge. \[Here Yoga and Knowledge are
identical. Yoga is that through which one gets connected, identified.
with Brahman.\] which is based on Sankya-buddhi, in, 'Two kinds of
adherences were spoken of by Me in the form of the Vedas, in the days of
yore.' \[This portion is ascending to G1.Pr. and A.A.; Ast. omits this
and otes exactly the first line of 3.3. By saying, 'in the form of the
Vedas', the Lord indicates that the Vedas, which are really the
knowledge inherent in God and issue out of Him, are identical with
Himself.-Tr.\] similarly, in, 'through the Yoga of Action for the yogis'
(3.3), He will separately speak of the firm adherence to the Yoga \[Here
also Karma and Yoga are identical, and lead to Liberation by bringing
about purity of heart which is followed by steadfastness in Knowledge.\]
of Karma which is based on Yoga-buddhi (Conviction about Yoga). Thus,
the two kinds of steadfastness that based on the conviction about the
nature of the Self, and that based on the conviction about rites and
duties have been distinctly spoken of by the Lord Himself, who saw that
the coexistence of Knowledge and rites and duties is not possible in the
same person, they being based on the convictions of non-agentship and
agentship, unity and diversity (respectively). As is this teaching about
the distinction (of the two adherences), just so has it been revealed in
the Satapatha Brahmana: 'Desiring this world (the Self) alone monks and
Brahmanas renounce their homes' (cf. Br. 4.4.22). After thus enjoining
renunciation of all rites and duties, it is said in continuation, 'What
shall we acheive through childeren, we who have attained this Self, this
world (result).' \[The earlier otation implies an injuction (vidhi) for
renunciation, and the second is an arthavada, or an emphasis on that
injunction. Arthavada: A sentence which usually recommends a vidhi, or
precept, by stating the good arising from its proper observance, and the
evils arising from its omission; and also by adducing historical
instances in its support.-V.S.A\] Again, there itself it is said that,
before accepting a wife a man is in his natural state \[The state of
ignorance owing to non-realization of Reality. Such a person is a
Brahmacarin, who goes to a teacher for studying the Vedas\]. And (then)
after his eniries into rites and duties, \[The Brahmacarin first studies
the Vedas and then enires into their meaning. Leaving his teacher's
house after completing his course, he becomes a house holder.\] 'he' for
the attainment of the three worlds \[This world, the world of manes and
heaven.-Tr.\] 'desired' (see Br. 1.4.17) as their means a son and the
two kinds of wealth consists of rites and duties that lead to the world
of manes, and the divine wealth of acisition of vidya (meditation) which
leads to heaven. In this way it is shown that rites and duties enjoined
by the Vedas etc. are meant only for one who is unenlightened and is
passessed of desire. And in the text, 'After renouncing they take to
mendicancy' (see Br. 4.4.22), the injunction to renounce is only for one
who desires the world that is the Self, and who is devoid of hankering
(for anything else). Now, if the intention of the Lord were the
combination of Knowledge with Vedic rites and duties, then this
utterance (of the Lord) (3.3) about the distinction would have been
illogical. Nor would Arjuna's estion, 'If it be Your opinion that wisdom
(Knowledge) is superior to action (rites and duties)৷৷.,' etc. (3.1) be
proper. If the Lord had not spoken earlier of the impossibility of the
pursuit of Knowledge and rites and duties by the same person (at the
same time), then how could Arjuna falsely impute to the Lord by saying,
'If it be your opinion that wisdom is superior to action৷৷৷৷' (of having
spoken) what was not heard by him, viz the higher status of Knolwedge
over rites and duties; Morevoer, if it be that the combination of
Knowledge with rites and duties was spoken of for all, then it stands
enjoined, ipso facto, on Arjuna as well. Therefore, if instruction had
been given for practising both, then how could the estion about 'either
of the two' arise as in, 'Tell me for certain one of these (action and
renunciation) by which I may attain the highest Good' (3.2); Indeed,
when a physician tells a patient who has come for a cure of his
biliousness that he should take things which are sweet and soothing,
there can arise no such reest as, 'Tell me which one of these two is to
be taken as a means to cure biliousness'! Again, if it be imagined that
Arjuna put the estion because of his noncomprehension of the distinct
meaning of what the Lord had said, even then the Lord ought to have
answered in accordance with the estion: 'The combination of Knowledge
with rites and duties was spoken of by Me. Why are you confused thus;'
On the other hand, it was not proper to have answered, 'Two kinds of
steadfastness were spoken of by Me it the days of yore,' in a way that
was inconsistent and at variance with the estion. Nor even do all the
statements about distinction etc. become logical if it were intended
that Knowledge was to be combined with rites and duties enjoined by the
Smrtis only. Besides, the accusation in the sentence, 'Why then do you
urge me to horrible action' (3.1) becomes illogical on the part of
Arjuna who knew that fighting was a Ksatriya's natural duty enjoined by
the Smrtis. Therefore, it is not possible for anyone to show that in the
scripture called the Gita there is any combination, even in the least,
of Knowledge of the Self with rites and duties enjoined by the Srutis or
the Smrtis. But in the case of a man who had engaged himself in rites
and duties because of ignorance and defects like the attachment, and
then got his mind purified through sacrifices, charities or austerities
(see Br. 4.4.22), there arises the knowledge about the supreme Reality
that all this is but One, and Brahman is not an agent (of any action).
With regard to him, although there is a cessation of rites and duties as
also of the need for them, yet, what may, appear as his diligent
continuance, just as before, in those rites and duties for setting an
example before people that is no action in which case it could have
stood combined with Knowledge. Just as the actions of Lord Vasudeva, in
the form of performance of the duty of a Ksatriya, do not get combined
with Knowledge for the sake of achieving the human goal (Liberation),
similar is the case with the man of Knowledge because of the absence of
hankering for results and agentship. Indeed, a man who has realized the
Truth does not thingk 'I am doing (this)' nor does he hanker after its
result. Again, as for instance, person hankering after such desirable
things as heaven etc. may light up a fire for performing such rites as
Agnihotra etc. which are the mans to attain desirable things; \[The Ast.
reading is: Agnihotradi-karma-laksana-dharma-anusthanaya, for the
performance of duties in the form of acts like Agnihotra etc.-Tr.\]
then, while he is still engaged in the performance of Agnihotra etc. as
the means for the desirable things, the desire may get destroyed when
the rite is half-done. He may nevertheless continue the performance of
those very Agnihotra etc.; but those performance of those very Agnihotra
etc.; but those Agnihotra etc. cannot be held to be for this personal
gain. Accordingly does the Lord also show in various places that, 'even
while perfroming actions,' he does not act, 'he does not become tainted'
(5.7). As for the texts, '৷৷.as was performed earlier by the ancient
ones' (4.15), 'For Janaka and others strove to attain Liberation through
action itself' (3.20), they are to be understood analytically.
Objection: How so; Vedantin: As to that, if Janaka and others of old
remained engaged in activity even though they were knowers of Reality,
they did so for preventing people from going astray, while remaining
established in realization verily through the knowledge that 'the organs
rest (act) on the objects of the organs' (3.28). The idea is this that,
though the occasion for renunciation of activity did arise, they
remained established in realization along with actions; they did not
give up their rites and duties. On the other hand, if they were not
knowers of Reality, then the explanation should be this; Through the
discipline of dedicating rites and duties to God, Janaka and others
remained established in perfection (samsiddhi) either in the form of
purification of mind or rise of Knowledge. This very idea \[The idea
that rites and duties become the cause of Knowledge through the
purification of the mind.\] will be expressed by the Lord in, '(the
yogis) undertake action for the purification of oneself (i.e. of the
heart, or the mind)' (5.11). After having said, 'A human being achieves
success by adoring Him through his own duties' \[By performing one's own
duty as enjoined by scriptures and dedicating their results to God,
one's mind becomes purified. Then, through Gods grace one becomes fit
for steadfastness in Knowledge. From that steadfatness follows
Liberation. Therefore rites and duites do not directly lead to
Liberation. (See Common. under 5.12) (18.46), He will again speak of the
steadfastness in Knowledge of a person who has attained success, in the
text, '(Understand৷৷.from Me৷৷.that process by which) one who has
achieved success attains Brahman' (18.50). So, the definite conclusion
in the Gita is that Liberation is attained only from the knowledge of
Reality, and not from its combination with action. And by pointing out
in the relevant contexts the (aforesaid) distinction, we shall show how
this conclusion stands. That being so, Lord Vasudeva found that for
Arjuna, whose mind was thus confused about what ought to be done \[The
ast. and A.A., have an additional word mithyajnanavatah, meaning 'who
had false ignorance'.-Tr.\] and who was sunk in a great ocean of sorrow,
there could be no rescue other than through the knowledge of the Self.
And desiring to rescue Arjuna from that, He said, '(You grieve for)
those who are not to be grieved for,' etc. by way of introducing the
knowledge of the Self. \[In this Gita there are three distinct parts,
each part consisting of six chapters. These three parts deal with the
three words of the great Upanisadic saying, 'Tattvamasi, thou art That',
with a view to finding out their real meanings. The first six chapters
are concerned with the word tvam (thou); the following six chapters
determine the meaning of the word tat (that); and the last six reveal
the essential identity of tvam and tat. The disciplines necessary for
realization this identity are stated in the relevant places.\]
