+++
title = "16 नासतो विद्यते"

+++
2.16 Since 'the unreal has no being,' etc., for this reason also it is
proper to bear cold, heat, etc. without becoming sorrowful or deluded.
Asatah, of the unreal, of cold, heat, etc. together with their causes;
na vidyate, there is no; bhavah, being, existence, reality; because
heat, cold, etc. together with their causes are not substantially real
when tested by means of proof. For they are changeful, and whatever is
changeful is inconstant. As configurations like pot etc. are unreal
since they are not perceived to be different from earth when tested by
the eyes, so also are all changeful things unreal because they are not
perceived to be different from their (material) causes, and also because
they are not perceived before (their) origination and after destruction.
Objection: If it be that \[Here Ast. has the additional words 'karyasya
ghatadeh, the effect, viz pot etc. (and)'.-Tr.\] such (material) causes
as earth etc. as also their causes are unreal since they are not
perceived differently from their causes, in that case, may it not be
urged that owing to the nonexistence of those (causes) there will arise
the contingency of everything becoming unreal \[An entity cannot be said
to be unreal merely because it is non-different from its cause. Were it
to be asserted as being unreal, then the cause also should be unreal,
because there is no entity which is not subject to the law of cuase and
effect.\]; Vedantin: No, for in all cases there is the experience of two
awarenesses, viz the awareness of reality, and the awareness of
unreality. \[In all cases of perception two awarenesses are involved:
one is invariable, and the other is variable. Since the variable is
imagined on the invariable, therefore it is proved that there is
something which is the substratum of all imagination, and which is
neither a cause nor an effect.\] That in relation to which the awareness
does not change is real; that in relation to which it changes is unreal.
Thus, since the distinction between the real and the unreal is dependent
on awareness, therefore in all cases (of empirical experiences) everyone
has two kinds of awarenesses with regard to the same substratum: (As for
instance, the experiences) 'The pot is real', 'The cloth is real', 'The
elephant is real' (which experiences) are not like (that of) 'A blue
lotus'. \[In the empirical experience, 'A blue lotus', there are two
awarenesses concerned with two entities, viz the substance (lotus) and
the ality (blueness). In the case of the experience, 'The pot is real',
etc. the awarenesses are not concerned with substratum and alities, but
the awareness of pot,of cloth, etc. are superimposed on the awareness of
'reality', like that of 'water' in a mirage.\] This is how it happens
everywhere. \[The coexistence of 'reality' and 'pot' etc. are valid only
empirically according to the non-dualists; whereas the coexistence of
'blueness' and 'lotus' is real according to the dualists.\] Of these two
awareness, the awareness of pot etc. is inconstant; and thus has it been
shown above. But the awareness of reality is not (inconstant). Therefore
the object of the awareness of pot etc. is unreal because of
inconstancy; but not so the object of the awareness of reality, because
of its constancy. Objection: If it be argued that, since the awareness
of pot also changes when the pot is destroyed, therefore the awareness
of the pot's reality is also changeful; Vedantin: No, because in cloth
etc. the awareness of reality is seen to persist. That awareness relates
to the odjective (and not to the noun 'pot'). For this reason also it is
not destroyed. \[This last sentence has been cited in the f.n. of
A.A.-Tr.\] Objection: If it be argued that like the awareness of
reality, the awareness of a pot also persists in other pots; Vedantin:
No, because that (awareness of pot) is not present in (the awareness of)
a cloth etc. Objection: May it not be that even the awareness of reality
is not present in relation to a pot that has been destroyed; Vedantin:
No, because the noun is absent (there). Since the awareness of reality
corresponds to the adjective (i.e. it is used adjectivelly), therefore,
when the noun is missing there is no possibility of its (that awareness)
being an adjective. So, to what should it relate; But, again, the
awareness of reality (does not cease) with the absence of an object৷৷
\[Even when a pot is absent and the awareness of reality does not arise
with regare to it, the awareness of reality persists in the region where
the pot had existed. Some read nanu in place of na tu ('But, again'). In
that case, the first portion (No,৷৷.since৷৷.adjective. So,৷৷.relate;) is
a statement of the Vedantin, and the Objection starts from nanu punah
sadbuddheh, etc. so, the next Objection will run thus: 'May it not be
said that, when nouns like pot etc. are absent, the awareness of
existence has no noun to alify, and therefore it becomes impossible for
it (the awareness of existence) to exist in the same substratum;'-Tr.\]
Objection: May it not be said that, when nouns like pot etc. are absent,
(the awareness of existence has no noun to alify and therefore) it
becomes impossible for it to exist in the same substratum; \[The
relationship of an adjective and a noun is seen between two real
entities. Therefore, if the relationship between 'pot' and 'reality' be
the same as between a noun and an adjective, then both of them will be
real entities. So, the coexistence of reality with a non-pot does not
stand to reason.\] Vedantin: No, because in such experiences as, 'This
water exists', (which arises on seeing a mirage etc.) it is observed
that there is a coexistence of two objects though one of them is
non-existent. Therefore, asatah, of the unreal, viz body etc. and the
dualities (heat, cold, etc.), together with their causes; na vidyate,
there is no; bhavah, being. And similarly, satah, of the real, of the
Self; na vidyate, there is no; abhavah, nonexistence, because It is
constant everywhere. This is what we have said. Tu, but; antah, the
nature, the conclusion (regarding the nature of the real and the unreal)
that the Real is verily real, and the unreal is verily unreal; ubhayoh
api, of both these indeed, of the Self and the non-Self, of the Real and
the unreal, as explained above; drstah, has been realized thus;
tattva-darsibhih, by the seers of Truth. Tat is a pronoun (Sarvanama,
lit. name of all) which can be used with regard to all. And all is
Brahman. And Its name is tat. The abstraction of tat is tattva, the true
nature of Brahman. Those who are apt to realize this are
tattva-darsinah, seers of Truth. Therefore, you too, by adopting the
vision of the men of realization and giving up sorrow and delusion,
forbear the dualities, heat, cold, etc. some of which are definite in
their nature, and others inconstant , mentally being convinced that this
(phenomenal world) is changeful, verily unreal and appears falsely like
water in a mirage. This is the idea. What, again, is that reality which
remains verily as the Real and surely for ever; This is being answered
in, 'But know That', etc.
