+++
title = "18 अन्तवन्त इमे"

+++
2.18 Ime, these; antavantah, destructible; dehah, bodies as the idea of
reality which continues with regard to water in a mirage, etc. gets
eliminated when examined with the means of knowledge, and that is its
end, so are these bodies and they have an end like bodies etc. in dream
and magic ; uktah, are said, by discriminating people; to belong
nityasya, to the everlasting; anasinah, the indestructible; aprameyasya,
the indeterminable; sarirnah, embodied One, the Self. This is the
meaning. The two words 'everlasting' and 'indestructible' are not
repetitive, because in common usage everlastingness and destructibility
are of two kinds. As for instance, a body which is reduced to ashes and
has disappeared is said to have been destoryed. (And) even while
existing, when it becomes transfigured by being afflicted with diseases
etc. it is said to be 'destroyed'. \[Here the A.A. adds 'tatha
dhana-nase-apyevam, similar is the case even with regard to loss of
wealth.'-Tr.\] That being so, by the two words 'everlasting' and
'indestructible' it is meant that It is not subject to both kinds of
distruction. Otherwise, the everlastingness of the Self would be like
that of the earth etc. Therefore, in order that this contingency may not
arise, it is said, 'Of the everlasting, indestructible'. Aprameyasya, of
the indeterminable, means 'of that which cannot be determined by such
means of knowledge as direct perception etc.' Objection: Is it not that
the Self is determined by the scriptures, and before that through direct
perception etc.; Vedantin: No, because the Self is self-evident. For,
(only) when the Self stands predetermined as the knower, there is a
search for a means of knolwedge by the knower. Indeed, it is not that
without first determining oneself as, 'I am such', one takes up the task
of determining an object of knowledge. For what is called the 'self'
does not remain unknown to anyone. But the scripture is the final
authority \[when the Vedic text establishes Brahman as the innermost
Self, all the distinctions such as knower, known and the means of
knowledge become sublated. Thus it is reasonable that the Vedic text
should be the final authority. Besides, its authority is derived from
its being faultless in as much as it has not originated from any human
being.\]: By way of merely negating superimposition of alities that do
not belong to the Self, it attains authoritativeness with regard to the
Self, but not by virtue of making some unknown thing known. There is an
Upanisadic text in support of this: '৷৷.the Brahman that is immediate
and direct, the Self that is within all' (Br. 3.4.1). Since the Self is
thus eternal and unchanging, tasmat, therefore; yudhyasva, you join the
battle, i.e. do not desist from the war. Here there is no injunction to
take up war as a duty, because be (Arjuna), though he was determined for
war, remains silent as a result of being overpowered by sorrow and
delusion. Therefore, all that is being done by the Lord is the removal
of the obstruction to his duty. 'Therefore, join the battle' is only an
approval, not an injunction. The scripture Gita is intended for
eradicating sorrow, delusion, etc. which are the cases of the cycle of
births and deaths; it is not intended to enjoin action. As evidences of
this idea the Lord cites two Vedic verses: \[Ka. 1.2.19-20. There are
slight verbal differences.-Tr.\]
