+++
title = "20 न जायते"

+++
2.20 Na kadacit, neverl; is ayam, this One; jayate, born i.e. the Self
has no change in the form of being born to which matter is subject ; va,
and ( va is used in the sense of and); na mriyate, It never dies. By
this is denied the final change in the form of destruction. The word
(na) kadacit), never, is connected with the denial of all kinds of
changes thus never, is It born never does It die, and so on. Since ayam,
this Self; bhutva, having come to exist, having experienced the process
of origination; na, will not; bhuyah, again; abhavita, cease to be
thereafter, therefore It does not die. For, in common parlance, that
which ceases to exist after coming into being is said to die. From the
use of the word va, nor, and na, it is understood that, unlike the body,
this Self does not again come into existence after having been
non-existent. Therefore It is not born. For, the words, 'It is born',
are used with regard to something which comes into existence after
having been non-existent. The Self is not like this. Therfore It is not
born. Since this is so, therefore It is ajah, birthless; and since It
does not die, therefore It is nityah, eternal. Although all changes
become negated by the denial of the first and the last kinds of changes,
still changes occuring in the middle \[For the six kinds of changes see
note under verse 2.10.-Tr.\] should be denied with their own respective
terms by which they are implied. Therefore the text says sasvatah,
undecaying,. so that all the changes, viz youth etc., which have not
been mentioned may become negated. The change in the form of decay is
denied by the word sasvata, that which lasts for ever. In Its own nature
It does not decay because It is free from parts. And again, since it is
without alities, there is no degeneration owing to the decay of any
ality. Change in the form of growth, which is opposed to decay, is also
denied by the word puranah, ancient. A thing that grows by the addition
of some parts is said to increase and is also said to be new. But this
Self was fresh even in the past due to Its partlessness. Thus It is
puranah, i.e. It does not grow. So also, na hanyate, It is puranah, i.e.
It does not grow. So also, na hanyate, It is not killed, It does not get
transformed; even when sarire, the body; hanyamane, is killed,
transformed. The verb 'to kill' has to be understood here in the sense
of transformation, so that a tautology \[This verse has already
mentioned 'death' in the first line. If the verb han, to kill, is also
taken in the sense of killing, then a tautology is unavoidable.-Tr.\]
may be avoided. In this mantra the six kinds of transformations, the
material changes seen in the world, are denied in the Self. The meaning
of the sentence is that the Self is devoid of all kinds of changes.
Since this is so, therefore 'both of them do not know' this is how the
present mantra is connected to the earlier mantra.
