+++
title = "21 वेदाविनाशिनन् नित्यम्"

+++
2.21 In the mantra, 'He who thinks of this One as the killer,' having
declared that (the Self) does not become the agent or the object of the
actof killing, and then in the mantra, 'Never is this One born,' etc.,
having stated the reasons for (Its) changelessness, the Lord sums up the
purport of what was declared above: He who knows this One as
indestructible, etc. Yah, he who; veda, knows yah is to be thus
connected with Veda ; enam, this One, possessing the characteristics
stated in the earlier mantra; as avinasinam, indestructible, devoid of
the final change of state; nityam, eternal, devoid of transformation;
ajam, birthless; and avyayam, undecaying; katham, how, in what way; (and
kam, whom;) does sah, that man of realization; purusah, the person who
is himself an authority \[i.e. above all injunctions and prohibitions.
See 18.16.17.-Tr.\]; hanti, kill, undertake the act of killing; or how
ghatayati, does he cause (others) to be killed, (how does he) instigate
a killer! The intention is to deny both (the acts) by saying, 'In no way
does he kill any one, nor does he cause anyone to be killed', because an
interrogative sense is absurd (here). Since the implication of the
reason \[The reason for the denial of killing etc. is the changelessness
of the Self, and this reason holds good with regard to all actions of
the man of realization.-Tr.\], viz the immutability of the Self, \[The
A.A. omits 'viz the immutability of the Self'.-Tr.\] is common (with
regard to all actions), therefore the negation of all kinds of actions
in the case of a man of realization is what the Lord conveys as the only
purport of this context. But the denial of (the act of) killing has been
cited by way of an example. Objection: By noticing what special reason
for the impossibility of actions in the case of the man of realization
does the Lord deny all actions (in his case) by saying, 'How can that
person,' etc.; Vedantin: Has not the immutability of the Self been
already stated as the reason \[Some readings omit this word.-Tr.\] , the
specific ground for the impossibility of all actions; Objection: It is
true that it has been stated; but that is not a specific ground, for the
man of realization is different from the immutable Self. Indeed, may it
not be argued that action does not become impossible for one who has
known as unchanging stump of a tree;! Vedantin: No, because of man of
Knowledge is one with the Self. Enlightenment does not belong to the
aggregate of body and senses. Therefore, as the last laternative, the
knower is the Immutable and is the Self which is not a part of the
aggregate. Thus, action being impossible for that man of Knowledge, the
denial in, 'How can that person৷৷.,' etc. is reasonable. As on account
of the lack of knowledge of the distinction between the Self and the
modifications of the intellect, the Self, though verily immutable, is
imagined through ignorance to be the perceiver of objects like sound
etc. presented by the intellect etc., in this very way, the Self, which
in reality is immutable, is said to be the 'knower' because of Its
association with the knowledge of the distinction between the Self and
non-Self, which (knowledge) is a modification of the intellect \[By
buddhi-vrtti, modification of the intellect, is meant the transformation
of the internal organ into the form of an extension upto an object,
along with its past impressions, the senses concerned, etc., like the
extension of the light of a lamp illuminating an object. Consciousness
reflected on this transformation and remaining indistinguishable from
that transformation revealing the object, is called objective knowledge.
Thery, due to ignorance, the Self is imagined to be the perceiver
because of Its connection with the vrtti, modification. (-A.G.) The
process is elsewhere described as follows: The vrtti goes out through
the sense-organ concerned, like the flash of a torchlight, and along
with it goes the reflection of Consciousness. Both of them envelop the
object, a pot for instance. The vrtti destroys the ignorance about the
pot; and the reflection of Consciousness, becoming unified with only
that portion of it which has been delimited by the pot, reveals the pot.
In the case of knowledge of Brahman, it is admitted that the vrtti in
the form, 'I am Brahman', does reach Brahman and destroys ignorance
about Brahman, but it is not admitted that Brahman is revealed like a
'pot', for Brahman is self-effulgent.-Tr.\] and is unreal by nature.
From the statement that action is impossible for man of realization it
is understood that the conclusion of the Lord is that, actions enjoined
by the scriptures are prescribed for the unenlightened. Objection: Is
not elightenment too enjoined for the ignorant; For, the injunction
about enlightenment to one who has already achieved realization is
useless, like grinding something that has already been ground! This
being so, the distinction that rites and duties are enjoined for the
unenlightened, and not for the enlightened one, does not stand to
reason. Vedantin: No. There can reasonable be a distinction between the
existence or nonexistence of a thing to be performed. As after the
knowledge of the meaning of the injunction for rites like Agnihotra etc.
their performance becomes bligatory on the unenlightened one who thinks,
'Agnihotra etc. has to be performed by collecting various accessories; I
am the agent, and this is my duty', unlike this, nothing remains later
on to be performed as a duty after knowing the meaning of the injunction
about the nature of the Self from such texts as, 'Never is this One
born,' etc. But apart from the rise of knowledge regarding the unity of
the Self, his non-agency, etc., in the form, 'I am not the agent, I am
not the enjoyer', etc., no other idea arises. Thus, this distinction can
be maintained. Again, for anyone who knows himself as, 'I am the agent',
there will necessarily arise the idea, 'This is my duty.' In relation to
that he becomes eligible. In this way duties are (enjoined) \[Ast. adds
'sambhavanti, become possible'.-Tr.\] for him. And according to the
text, 'both of them do not know' (19), he is an unenlightened man. And
the text, 'How can that person,' etc. concerns the enlightened person
distinguished above, becuase of the negation of action (in this text).
Therefore, the enlightened person distinguished above, who has realized
the immutable Self, and the seeker of Liberation are alified only for
renunciation of all rites and duties. Therefore, indeed, the Lord
Narayana, making a distinction between the enlightened man of Knowledge
and the unenlightened man of rites and duties, makes them take up the
two kinds of adherences in the text, 'through the Yoga of Knowledge for
the men of realization; through the Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3).
Similarly also, Vyasa said to his son, 'Now, there are these two paths,'
etc. \['Now, there are these two paths on which the Vedas are based.
They are thought of as the dharma characterized by engagement in duties,
and that by renunciation of them' (Mbh. Sa. 241.6).-Tr.\] So also (there
is a Vedic text meaning): 'The path of rites and duties, indeed, is the
earlier, and renunciation comes after that.' \[Ast. says that this is
not a otation, but only gives the purport of Tai, Ar. 10.62.12.-Tr.\]
The Lord will show again and again this very division: 'The
unenlightened man who is deluded by egoism thinks thus: "I am the doer";
but the one who is a knower of the facts (about the varieties of the
gunas) thinks, "I do not act"' (cf. 3.27,28). So also there is the text,
'(The embodied man of selfcontrol,) having given up all actions
mentally, continues (happily in the town of nine gates)' (5.13) etc.
With regard to this some wiseacres say: In no person does arise the
idea, 'I am the changeless, actionless Self, which is One and devoid of
the six kinds of changes beginning with birth to which all things are
subject', on the occurrence of which (idea alone) can renunciation of
all actions be enjoined. That is not correct, because it will lead to
the needlessness of such scriptural instructions as, 'Never is this One
born,' etc. (20). They should be asked: As on the authority of scripural
instructions there arises the knowledge of the existence of virtue and
vice and the knowledge regarding an agent who gets associated with
successive bodies, similarly, why should not there arise from the
scriptures the knowledge of unchangeability, non-agentship, oneness,
etc. of that very Self; Objection: If it be said that this is due to Its
being beyond the scope of any means (of knowledge); Vedantin: No,
because the Sruti says, 'It is to be realized through the mind alone,
(following the instruction of the teacher)' (Br. 4.4.19). The mind that
is purified by the instructions of the scriptures and the teacher,
control of the body and organs, etc. becomes the instrument for
realizing the Self. Again, since there exist inference and scriptures
for Its realization, it is mere bravado to say that Knowledge does not
arise. And it has to be granted that when knowledge arises, it surely
eliminates ignorance, its opposite. And that ignorance has been shown
in, 'I am the killer', 'I am killed', and 'both of them do not know'
(see 2.19). And here also it is shown that the idea of the Self being an
agent, the object of an action, or an indirect agent, is the result of
ignorance. Also, the Self being changeless, the fact that such agentship
etc. are cuased by ignorance is a common factor in all actions without
exception, because only that agent who is subject to change instigates
someone else who is different from himself and can be acted on, saying,
'Do this.' Thus, with a view to pointing out the absence of fitness for
rites and duties in the case of an enlightened person, the Lord \[Ast,
adds vasudeva after 'Lord'.-Tr.\] says, 'He who knows this One as
indestructible,' 'how can that person,' etc. thery denying this direct
and indirect agentship of an enlightened person in respect of all
actions without exception. As regards the estion, 'For what, again, is
the man of enlightenment alified;', the answer has already been give
earlier in, 'through the Yoga of Knowledge for the men of realization'
(3.3). Similarly, the Lord will also speak of renunication of all
actions in, 'having given up all actions mentally,' etc.(5.13).
Objection: May it not be argued that from the expression, 'mentally',
(it follows that) oral and bodily actions are not to be renounced;
Vedantin: No, because of the categoric expression, 'all actions'.
Objection: May it not be argued that 'all actions' relates only to those
of the mind; Vedantin: No, because all oral and bodily actions are
preceded by those of the mind, for those actions are impossible in the
absence of mental activity. Objection: May it not be said that one has
to mentally renounce all other activities except the mental functions
which are the causes of scriptural rites and duties performed through
speech and body; Vedantin: No, because it has been specifically
expressed: 'without doing or causing (others) to do anything at all'
(5.13). Objection: May it not be that this renunciation of all actions,
as stated by the Lord, is with regard to a dying man, not one living;
Vedantin: No, because (in that case) the specific statement, 'The
embodied man৷৷.continues happily in the town of nine gates' (ibid.) will
become illogical since it is not possible for a dead person, who neither
acts nor makes others act, \[The words 'akurvatah akarayatah, (of him)
who neither acts nor makes others act', have been taken as a part of the
Commentator's arguement. But A.G. points out that they can also form a
part of the next Objection. In that, case, the translation of the
Objection will be this: Can it not be that the construction of the
sentence (under discussion) is Neither doing nor making others do, he
rest by depositing (sannyasya, by renouncing) in the body', but not 'he
rests in the body by renouncing৷৷.';\] to rest in that body after
renouncing all actions. Objection: Can it not be that the construction
of the sentence (under discussion) is, '(he rests) by depositing
(sannyasya, by renouncing) in the body', (but) not 'he rests in the body
by renouncing৷৷.'; Vedantin: No, because everywhere it is categorically
asserted that the Self is changeless. Besides, the action of 'resting'
reires a location, whereas renunciation is independent of this. The word
nyasa preceded by sam here means 'renunciation', not 'depositing'.
Therefore, according to this Scripture, viz the Gita, the man of
realization is eligible for renunciation, alone, not for rites and
duties. This we shall show in the relevant texts later on in the cotext
of the knowledge of the Self. And now we shall speak of the matter on
hand: As to that, the indestructibility \[Indestructibility suggests
unchangeability as well.\] of the Self, has been postulated. What is it
like; That is being said in, 'As after rejecting wornout clothes,' etc.
