+++
title = "38 सुखदुःखे समे"

+++
2.38 As regards that, listen to this advice for you then you are engaged
in battle considering it to be your duty: Krtva, treating; sukha-duhkhe,
happiness and sorrow; same, with eanimity, i.e. without having likes and
dislikes; so also treating labha-alabhau, gain and loss; jaya-ajayau,
conest and defeat, as the same; tatah, then; yuddhaya yujyasva, engage
in battle. Evam, thus by undertaking the fight; na avapsyasi, you will
not incur; papam, sin. This advice is incidental. \[The context here is
that of the philosophy of the supreme Reality. If fighting is enjoined
in that context, it will amount to accepting combination of Knowledge
and actions. To avoid this contingency the Commentator says,
'incidental'. That is to say, although the context is of the supreme
Reality, the advice to fight is incidental. It is not an injunction to
combine Knowledge with actions, since fighting is here the natural duty
of Arjuna as a Ksatriya.\]. The generally accepted argument for the
removal of sorrow and delusion has been stated in the verses beginning
with, 'Even considering your own duty' (31), etc., but this has not been
presented by accepting that as the real intention (of the Lord). The
real context here (in 2.12 etc.), however, is of the realization of the
supreme Reality. Now, in order to show the distinction between the (two)
topics dealt with in this scripture, the Lord concludes that topic which
has been presented above (in 2.20 etc.), by saying, 'This (wisdom) has
been imparted,' etc. For, if the distinction between the topics of the
scripute be shown here, then the instruction relating to the two kinds
of adherences as stated later on in, 'through the Yoga of Knowledge for
the men of realization; through the Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3)
will proceed again smoothly, and the hearer also will easily comprehend
it by keeping in view the distinction between the topics. Hence the Lord
says:
