+++
title = "43 कामात्मानः स्वर्गपरा"

+++
2.43 Partha, O son of Prtha; those devoid of one-pointed conviction, who
pravadanti, utter; imam, this; yam puspitam vacam, flowery talk, which
is going to be stated, which is beautiful like a tree in bloom, pleasant
to hear, and appears to be (meaningful) sentences \[Sentences that can
be called really meaningful are only those that reveal the self.-Tr.\];
who are they; they are avipascitah, people who are undiscerning, of poor
intellect, i.e. non-discriminating; veda-vada-ratah, who remain
engrossed in the utterances of the Vedas, in the Vedic sentences which
reveal many panegyrics, fruits of action and their means; and vadinah,
who declare, are apt tosay; iti, that; na anyat, nothing else \[God,
Liberation, etc.\]; asti, exists, apart from the rites and duties
conducive to such results as attainment of heaven etc. And they are
kamatmanah, have their minds full of desires, i.e. they are swayed by
desires, they are, by nature, full of desires; (and) svarga-parah, have
heaven as the goal. Those who accept heaven (svarga) as the supreme
(para) human goal, to whom heaven is the highest, are svarga-parah. They
utter that speech ( this is supplied to construct the sentence ) which
janma-karma-phala-pradam, promises birth as a result of rites and
duties. The result (phala) of rites and duties (karma) is karma-phala.
Birth (janma) itself is the karma-phala. That (speech) which promises
this is janma-karma-phala-prada. (This speech) is kriya-visesa-bahulam,
full of various special rites; bhoga-aisvarya-gatim-prati, for the
attainment of enjoyment and affluence. Special (visesa) rites (kriya)
are kriya-visesah. The speech that is full (bahula) of these, the speech
by which that is full (bahula) of these, the speech by which these, viz
objects such as heaven, animals and sons, are revealed plentifully, is
kriya-visesa-bahula. Bhoga, enjoyment, and aisvarya, affluence, are
bhoga-aisvarya. Their attainment (gatih) is bhoga-aisvarya-gatih. (They
utter a speech) that is full of the specialized rites, prati, meant for
that (attainment). The fools who utter that speech move in the cycle of
transmigration. This is the idea.
