+++
title = "45 त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदा"

+++
2.45 To those who are thus devoid of discriminating wisdom, who indulge
in pleasure, \[Here Ast. adds 'yat phalam tad aha, what result accrues,
that the Lord states:'-Tr.\] O Arjuna, vedah, the Vedas;
traigunya-visayah, have the three alities as their object, have the
three gunas, \[Traigunya means the collection of the three alities, viz
sattva (purity), rajas (energy) and tamas (darkness); i.e. the
collection of virtuous, vicious and mixed activities, as also their
results. In this derivative sense traigunya means the worldly life.\]
i.e. the worldly life, as the object to be revealed. But you bhava,
become; nistraigunyah, free from the three alities, i.e. be free from
desires. \[There is a seeming conflict between the advices to be free
from the three alities and to be ever-poised in the ality of sattva.
Hence, the Commentator takes the phrase nistraigunya to mean niskama,
free from desires.\] (Be) nirdvandvah, free from the pairs of duality by
the word dvandva, duality, are meant the conflicting pairs \[Of heat and
cold, etc.\] which are the causes of happiness and sorrow; you become
free from them. \[From heat, cold, etc. That is, forbear them.\] You
become nitya-sattvasthah, ever-poised in the ality of sattva; (and) so
also niryoga-ksemah, without (desire for) acisition and protection. Yoga
means acisition of what one has not, and ksema means the protection of
what one has. For one who as 'acisition and protection' foremost in his
mind, it is difficult to seek Liberation. Hence, you be free from
acisition and protection. And also be atmavan, self-collected, vigilant.
This is the advice given to you while you are engaged in your own duty.
\[And not from the point of view of seeking Liberation.\]
