+++
title = "46 यावानर्थ उदपाने"

+++
2.46 If there be no need for the infinite results of all the rites and
duties mentioned in the Vedas, then why should they be performed as a
dedication to God; Listen to the answer being given: In the world,
yavan, whatever; arthah, utility, use, like bathing, drinking, etc.; one
has udapane, in a well, pond and other numerous limited reservoirs; all
that, indeed, is achieved, i.e. all those needs are fulfilled to that
very extent; sampluhtodake, when there is a flood; sarvatah, all arount.
In a similar manner, whatever utility, result of action, there is
sarvesu, in all; the vedesu, Vedas, i.e. in the rites and duties
mentioned in the Vedas; all that utility is achieved, i.e. gets
fulfilled; tavan, to that very extent; in that result of realization
which comes brahmanasya, to a Brahmana, a sannyasin; vijanatah, who
knows the Reality that is the supreme Goal that result being comparable
to the flood all around. For there is the Upanisadic text, '৷৷.so all
virtuous deeds performed by people get included in this one৷৷.who knows
what he (Raikva) knows৷৷.' (Ch. 4.1.4). The Lord also will say, 'all
actions in their totality culminate in Knowledge' (4.33). \[The
Commentators otation from the Ch. relates to meditation on the alified
Brahman. Lest it be concluded that the present verse relates to
knowledge of the alified Brahman only, he otes again from the Gita
toshow that the conclusion holds good in the case of knowledge of the
absolute Brahman as well.\] Therefore, before one attains the fitness
for steadfastness in Knowledge, rites and duties, even though they have
(limited) utility as that of a well, pond, etc., have to be undertaken
by one who is fit for rites and duties.
