+++
title = "51 कर्मजम् बुद्धियुक्ता"

+++
2.51 The words 'phalam tyaktva, by giving up the fruits' are connected
with the remote word 'karmajam, produced by actions'. Hi, because;
\[Because, when actions are performed with an attitude of eanimity, it
leads to becoming freed from sin etc. Therefore, by stages, it becomes
the cause of Liberation as well.\] buddhi-yuktah, those who are devoted
to wisdom, who are imbued with the wisdom of eanimity; (they) becoming
manisinah, men of Enlightenment; tyaktva, by giving up; phalam, the
fruit, the acisition of desirable and undesriable bodies; \[Desirable:
the bodies of gods and others; undesirable: the bodies of animals etc.\]
karmajam, produced by actions; gacchanti, reach; padam, the state, the
supreme state of Visnu, called Liberation; anamayam, beyond evils, i.e.
beyond all evils; by having become janma-bandha-vinirmuktah, freed from
the bondage of birth birth (janma) itself is a bondage (bandha);
becoming freed from that , even while living. Or: Since it (buddhi) has
been mentioned as the direct cause of the elimination of righteousness
and unrighteousness, and so on, therefore what has been presented (in
the three verses) beginning with, 'O Dhananjaya,৷৷.to the yoga of
wisdom' (49), is enlightenment itself, which consists in the realization
of the supreme Goal, which is comparable to a flood all around, and
which arises from the purification of the mind as a result of
Karma-yoga. \[In the first portion of the Commentary buddhi has been
taken to mean samattva buddhi (wisdom of eanimity); the alternative
meaning of buddhi has been taken as 'enlightenment'. So, action is to be
performed by taking the help of the 'wisdom about the supreme Reality'
which has been chosen as one's Goal.\]
