+++
title = "53 श्रुतिविप्रतिपन्ना ते"

+++
2.53 If it be asked, 'By becoming possessed of the wisdom arising from
the discrimination about the Self after overcoming the turbidity of
delusion, when shall I attain the yoga of the supreme Reality which is
the fruit that results from Karma-yoga;', then listen to that; Yada,
when at the time when; te, your; buddhih, mind; that has become
sruti-vi-pratipanna, bewildered, tossed about, by hearing (the Vedas)
that reveal the diverse ends, means, and (their) relationship, i.e. are
filled with divergent ideas; sthasyati, will become; niscala,
unshakable, free from the trubulence in the form of distractions; and
acala, steadfast, that is to say, free from doubt even in that
(unshakable) state; samadhau, in samadhi, that is to say, in the Self
samadhi being derived in the sense of that in which the mind is fixed;
tada, then, at that time; avapsyasi, you will attain; yogam, Yoga, the
enlightenment, Self-absorption, that arises from discrimination. Having
got an occasion for iniry, Arjuna, with a view to knowing the
characteristics of one who has the realization of the Self, \[By the
word samadhi is meant the enlightenment arising from discrimination,
which has been spoken of in the commentary on the previous verse. The
steadfastness which the monks have in that enlightenment is called
steadfastness in Knowledge. Or the phrase may mean, 'the enlightenment
achieved through meditation on the Self', i.e. the realization of the
supreme Goal.\] asked:
