+++
title = "55 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
2.55 In the verses beginning from, 'When one fully renounces৷৷.', and
ending with the completion the Chapter, instruction about the
characteristics of the man of steady wisdom and the disciplines (he had
to pass through) is being given both for the one who has, indeed,
applied himself to steadfastness in the Yoga of Knowledge after having
renounced rites and duties from the very beginning \[Even while he is in
the stage of celibacy.\], and for the one who has (applied himself to
this after having passed) through the path of Karma-yoga. For in all the
scriptures without exception, dealing, with spirituality, whatever are
the characteristics of the man of realization are themselves presented
as the disciplines for an aspirant, because these (characteristics) are
the result of effort. And those that are the disciplines reiring effort,
they become the characteristics (of the man of realization). \[There are
two kinds of sannyasa vidvat (renunciation that naturally follows
Realization), and vividisa, formal renunciation for undertaking the
disciplines which lead to that Realization. According to A.G. the
characteristics presented in this and the following verses describe not
only the vidvat-sannyasin, but are also meant as disciplines for the
vividisa-sannyasin.-Tr.\] O Partha, yada, when, at the time when;
prajahati, one fully renounces; sarvan, all; the kaman, desires,
varieties of desires; manogatan, that have entered the mind, entered
into the heart . If all desires are renounced while the need for
maintaining the body persists, then, in the absence of anything to bring
satisfaction, there may arise the possibility of one's behaving like
lunatics or drunkards. \[A lunatic is one who has lost his power of
discrimination, and a drunkard is one who has that power but ignores
it.\] Hence it is said: Tustah, remains satisfied; atmani eva, in the
Self alone, in the very nature of the inmost Self; atmana, by the Self
which is his own indifferent to external gains, and satiated with
everything else on account of having attained the nector of realization
of the supreme Goal; tada, then; ucyate, he is called; sthita-prajnah, a
man of steady wisdom, a man of realization, one whose wisdom, arising
from the discrimination between the Self and the not-Self, is stable.
The idea is that the man of steady wisdom is a monk, who has renounced
the desire for progeny, wealth and the worlds, and who delights in the
Self and disports in the Self.
