+++
title = "59 विषया विनिवर्तन्ते"

+++
2.59 Although visayah, the objects, (i.e.) the organs, figuratively
implied and expressed by the word 'objects', or, the objects themselves;
vinivartante, recede; niraharasya dehinah, from an abstinent man, from
an embodied being, even from a fool who engages in painful austerity and
abstains from objects; (still, they do so) rasavarjam, with the
exception of the taste (for them), with the exception of the hankering
that one has for objects. The word rasa is well known as referring to
the sense of taste (hankering), as in such expressions as, 'sva-rasena
pravrttah, induced by his own taste (i.e. willingly)', 'rasikah, a man
of tastes', 'rasajnah, a connoisseur (of tastes)', etc. Api, even that;
rasah, taste of the nature of subtle attachment; asya, of this person,
of the sannyasin; nivartate, falls away, i.e. his objective perception
becomes seedless; when drstva, after attaining; param, the Absolute, the
Reality which is the supreme Goal, Brahman, he continues in life with
the realization, 'I verily am That (Brahman).' In the absence of full
realization there can be no eradication of the 'hankering'. The idea
conveyed is that, one should therefore stabilize one's wisdom which is
characterized by full realization. \[If it be held that attachment
cannot be eliminated without the knowledge of Brahman, and at the same
time that the knowledge of Brahman cannot arise until attachment is
eradicated, then we get involved in a vicious circle. In answer it is
said that gross attachments are eliminated through discrimination which
restrains the senses from being overpowered by objects. And the full
Knowledge arising thereof eliminates the subtle inclinations as well.
Hence there is no vicious circle involved.\] Since the organs have to be
first brought under his own control by one who desires to establish
firmly the wisdom which is characterized by full realization, therefore
the Lord speaks of the evil that arises from not keeping them under
control:
