+++
title = "62 ध्यायतो विषयान्पुंसः"

+++
2.62 Pumsah, in the case of a person; dhyayatah, who dwells on, thinks
of; visayan, the objects, the specialities \[Specialities: The charms
imagined in them.\] of the objects such as sound etc.; upajayate, there
arises; sangah, attachment, fondness, love; tesu, for them, for those
objects. Sangat, from attachment, from love; sanjayate, grows; kamah,
hankering, thirst. When that is obstructed from any arter, kamat, from
hankering; abhijayate, springs; krodhah, anger. Krodhat, from anger;
bhavati, follows; sammohah, delusion, absence of discrimination with
regard to what should or should not be done. For, an angry man, becoming
deluded, abuses even a teacher. Sammohat, from delusion; (comes)
smrti-vibhramah, failure of memory originating from the impressions
acired from the instructions of the scriptures and teachers. When there
is an occasion for memory to rise, it does not occur. Smrti-bhramsat,
from that failure of memory; (results) buddhi-nasah, loss of
understanding. The unfitness of the mind to discriminate between what
should or should not be done is called loss of understanding.
Buddhi-nasat, from the loss of understanding; pranasyati, he perishes.
Indeed, a man continues tobe himself so long as his mind remains fit to
distinguish between what he ought to and ought not do. When it becomes
unfit, a man is verily ruined. Therefore, when his internal organ, his
understanding, is destroyed, a man is ruined, i.e. he becomes unfit for
the human Goal. Thinking of objects has been said to be the root of all
evils. After that, this which is the cause of Liberation is being now
stated: \[If even the memory of objects be a source of evil, then their
enjoyment is more so. Hence, a sannyasin seeking Liberation cannot avoid
this evil, since he has to move about for food which is necessary for
the maintenance of his body. The present verse is an answer to this
apprehension.\]
