+++
title = "69 या निशा"

+++
2.69 ya, that which; sarva-bhutanam, for all creatures; is nisa, night
which being darkness (tamah) by nature, obliterates distinctions among
all things; what is that; that is the Reality which is the supreme Goal,
accessible to the man of steady wisdom. As that which verily appears as
day to the nocturnal creatures is night for others, similarly the
Reality wich is the supreme Goal appears to be night, as it were, to all
unenlightened beings who are comparable to the nocturnal creatures,
because It is beyond the range of vision of those who are devoid of that
wisdom. Samyami, the self-restrained man, whose organs are under
control, i.e. the yogi \[The man of realization.\] who has arisen from
the sleep of ignorance; jagarti, keeps awake; tasyam, in that (night)
characterized as the Reality, the supreme Goal. That night of ignorance,
characterized by the distinctions of subjects and objects, yasyam in
which; bhutani, the creatures, who are really asleep; are said to be
jagrati, keeping awake, in which night they are like dreamers in sleep;
sa nisa, it is night; pasyatah, to the seeing; muneh, sage, who
perceives the Reality that is the supreme Goal, because that (night) is
ignorance by nature. Therefore, rites and duties are enjoined only
during the state of ignorance, not in the state of enlightenment. For,
when Knowledge dawns, ignorance becomes eradicated like the darkness of
night after sun-rise. \[It may be argued that even after illumination
the phenomenal world, though it is known to be false, will continue to
be perceived because of the persistence of past impressions; therefore
there is scope for the validity of the scriptural injunctions even in
the case of an illumined soul. The answer is that there will be no scope
for the injunctions, because the man of realization will then have no
ardent leaning towards this differentiated phenomenal world which makes
an injunction relevant.\] Before the rise of Knowledge, ignorance,
accepted as a valid means of knowledge and presenting itself in the
different forms of actions, means and results, becomes the cause of all
rites and duties. It cannot reasonably become the source of rites and
duties (after Realization) when it is understood as an invalid means of
knowledge. For an agent becomes engaged in actions when he has the idea,
'Actions have been enjoined as a duty for me by the Vedas, which are a
valid means of knowledge'; but not when he understands that 'all this is
mere ignorance, like the night'. Again, the man to whom has come the
Knowledge that all these differences in their totality are mere
ignorance like the night, to that man who has realized the Self, there
is eligibility only for renouncing all actions, not for engaging in
actions. In accordance with this the Lord will show in the verse, 'Those
who have their intellect absorbed in That, whose Self is That' (5.17)
etc., that he has competence only for steadfastness in Knowledge.
Objection: May it not be argued that, there will be no reason for being
engaged even in that (steadfastness in Knowledge) if there be no valid
means of knowledge \[Vedic injunctions.\] to impel one to that.
\[Because, without an injunction nobody would engage in a duty, much
less in steadfastness to Knowledge.\] Answer: No, since 'knowledge of
the Self' relates to one's own Self. Indeed, by the very fact that It is
the Self, and since the validity of all the means of knowledge
culminates in It, \[The validity of all the means of knowledge holds
good only so long as the knowledge of the Self has not arisen.\]
therefore the Self does not depend on an injunction to impel It towards
Itself. \[Does the injunction relate to the knowledge of the Self. or to
the Self Itself; The first alternative is untenable because a valid
means of knowledge reveals its objects even without an injunction. The
second alternative also is untenable because the Self is self-revealing,
whereas an injunction is possible in the case of something yet to be
achieved. And one's own Self is not an object of that kind.\] Surely,
after the realization of the true nature of the Self, there is no scope
again for any means to, or end of, knowledge. The last valid means of
(Self-) knowledge eradicates the possibility of the Self's becoming a
perceiver. And even as it eradicates, it loses its own
authoritativeness, in the same way as the means of knowledge which is
valid in dream becomes unauthoritative during the waking state. In the
world, too, after the preception of an abject, the valid means of that
perception is not seen to be a cause impelling the knower (to any action
with regard to that object). Hence, it is established that, for an
knower of the Self, there remains no eligibility for rites and duties.
The attainment of Liberation is only for the sannyasin \[Liberation is
attained only by one who, after aciring an intellectual knowledge of the
Self in a general way, is endowed with discrimination and detachment,
has arisen above all desires, has become a monk in the primary sense,
and has directly realized the Self by going through the process of
sravana (understanding of Upanisadic texts about the Self), etc.\], the
man of enlightenment, who has renounced all desires and is a man of
steady wisdom; but not for him who has not renounced and is desirious of
the objects (of the senses). Such being the case, with a view to
establishing this with the help of an illustration, the Lord says:
