+++
title = "001 राजधर्मान् प्रवक्ष्यामि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

I am going to expound the duties of Kings; how the Lord of Men should conduct himself, how he came into existence and how excellent success accrues to him.—(1).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**धर्म**शब्दः कर्तव्यतावचन इत्य् उक्तम् । यद् राज्ञा कर्तव्यं तद् इदानीम् उच्यत इति प्रतिज्ञा । कर्तव्यं च दृष्टार्थं षाड्गुण्यादि, अदृष्टार्थम् अग्निहोत्रादि । तत्रेह प्राधान्येन दृष्टार्थम् उपदिश्यते । तत्रैव च राजधर्मप्रसिद्धिः । 

**राज**शब्दस् तु नेह क्षत्रियजातिवचनः, किं तर्ह्य् अभिषेकाधिपत्यादिगुणयोगिनि पुरुषे वर्तते । अत एवाह- **यथावृत्तो भवेन् नृपः** । नृपग्रहणेन जनपदैश्वर्यवतो ऽधिकारम् आह । प्रमाणान्तरमूला ह्य् अत्र धर्मा उच्यन्ते, न सर्वे वेदमूलाः । अन्यमूलत्वे च यद् अत्र धर्मशास्त्राविरुद्धं तद् उच्यते । तथा च कात्यायनः-

अर्थशास्त्रोक्तम् उत्सृज्य धर्मशास्त्रोक्तम् आव्रजेत् ॥ इति ।


**यथावृत्तः** यद् वृत्तं यत् प्रकारं वास्येति च बहुव्रीहिः । अन्यपदार्थो राजा । यथार्थप्राधान्ये ऽव्ययीभावः स्यात् । **वृत्तं** परिपालनार्थो व्यापारो ऽदृष्टार्थश् च । **संभवश् च** उत्पत्तिः । स उक्तो "राजानम् असृजत् प्रभुः" (म्ध् ७.३) इत्यादिना । **परमा** प्रकृष्टा सिद्धिर् विजिगीषोर् ऐकाधिपत्यम् । राजवृत्तस्य फलप्रतिज्ञेयम् ॥ ७.१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has already been pointed out that the term ‘*Dharma*’ denotes *what
ought to be done, duty*, so what the author promises in the present
verse is that he is now going to describe *what ought to be done by the
King*.

This duty is of two kinds—(1) pertaining to visible things, such as the
‘six courses of action’ and the like, and (2) pertaining to invisible
things, such as the *Agnihotra* and the like. In the present context it
is the former that is chiefly dealt with; and in fact it is only those
forms of activity that are generally known as ‘kingly duties.’

The term ‘*rājan*’, ‘king,’ in the present context, does not stand for
the *Kṣatriya caste*; it stands for that person who fulfills the
conditions of having been anointed, possessing the rights of sovereignty
and so forth. It is for this reason that the *Text* adds—‘*How the Lord
of Men should conduct himself*.’—The use of the term ‘lord of men’
indicates that what is stated here is applicable to the person who has
sovereignty over the people.

The duties expounded in the present connection are based, not all upon
the Veda, but on other sources of knowledge also. Among those based upon
other sources of information, those alone are stated here which are not
contrary to the *Science of Duty* (*Ethics*). Says *Kātyāyana*—‘One
shall renounce the Science of Politics and act according to the Science
of Duty.’

‘*Yathāvṛttaḥ*,’ ‘*how he should conduct himself*’;—the compound is to
be expounded as ‘*yaḍyatprakārakam vā vṛttam yasya*,’ a *Bahuvrīhi*
compound; the third factor referred to by it being the King. If the
compound were explained in the manner whereby the denotation of the
words of the compound itself formed the principal denotation of the
compound itself,—then it would have to be an *Aryayībhāva* (in the form
‘*yathāvṛttam*’).—‘*Conduct*’ stands for the action of protecting the
people and also of accomplishing some transcendental ends.

‘*Coming into existense*’, being created; as is going to be described
under verse 3—‘the Lord created the King’ and so forth.

‘*Excellent*’, highest,—‘*success*’, in the form of undisputed
sovereignty.

This verse states the rewards of the due fulfilment of kingly duties
(1).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 10), which adds
the following notes:—We proceed to consider the exact meaning of the
term ‘*rājan*’,—the question for determination being—(A) Is the name
‘rājā’ applied to any and every one doing the work of ‘protecting the
people?’ (B) or only to one simply belonging to the *Kṣatriya* caste (C)
or to that *Kṣatriya* alone who is duly anointed?

—Now in support of (A) we have the following arguments:—In popular usage
the name ‘*rājā*’ is applied to any one who owns and performs ‘*rājya*,’
the functions of the *rājā*, king; and these functions are actually
performed by the Brāhmaṇa and other castes also. In the *Nirukta* the
etymological meaning of ‘*rājā*’ is explained as ‘*rājate*,’ ‘one who
shines,’ *i.e*.,with royal glory; and this glory results only from the
proper ‘protection of the people.’ The Veda also speaks of *Soma* as
‘the *rājā* of Brāhmaṇas,’ and again as ‘the *rājā* among the
Gandharvas’;—in all these passages the term stands for the ‘lord,’ the
‘protector of the people.’

—In support of (B), the view that the term is applicable to the Kṣatriya
caste, we have the following arguments:—Manu, having introduced the
subject as ‘I am going to describe *Rājadharma*’ goes on to describe
such duties as the protecting of the people and so forth, all of which
pertains to the *Kṣatriya*, as is dear from the next verse which speaks
of ‘protection’ as the principal ‘*rājadharma*’; from all which it is
dear that it is the *Kṣatriya* alone that is entitled to ‘*rājya*,’ the
‘functions of the *Rājā*.’

It is in view of the ‘protection of the people’ being his duty that the
*Kṣatriya* alone is entitled to carry arms and to make a living by arms.
Yājñavalkya clearly declares ‘protecting of the people’ as the
‘principal duty *of the Kṣatriya*.’ Paṇini also lays down the affix
‘*ṣyañ*’ in the term ‘*rājya*’ in the sense of ‘function’ of the *rājā*,
*i.e*., the *Kṣatriya*. Anointing also has been prescribed for the
*Kṣatriya* only; the texts speak of the ‘anointing of the *Rājā*,’ which
means that the ceremony is to be performed by one who is already a Rājā;
and this can be true only of the *Kṣatriya* who alone is a ‘*rājā*’
(*i.e*., Kṣatriya) even *before being anointed*. Thus the primary
denotation of the term resting in the *Kṣatriya* only, whenever it is
applied to such Brāhmaṇas and other castes as do the work of the
‘*rājā*’ it should be understood to be used in a secondary or figurative
sense.

—(C) The third view has been held by Medhātithi and Kulllūka, both of
whom hold that the term is applicable to ‘any man who is equipped with
anointment and such other qualifications, and who does the work of
protecting the people.’ So also Haradatta on Gautamasūtra, and
*Mitākṣarā*, the latter applying it to such ‘Householder as is equipped
with anointment and other qualifications.’ On the ground of commonsense
also the duties laid down for the ‘*Rājā*’ must be taken as pertaining
to every one who has to do the work of ‘protecting the people.’ If they
did not, then what would be there for the guidance of those
*non-Kṣatriyas* who happen to be kings of men? *Aparārka* also declares
that the duties prescribed pertain to these *non-Kṣatriyas* also; though
it holds that the name ‘*rājā*’ is applicable only to that *Kṣatriya*
who has been anointed.

Having stated the arguments for the three views, the author declares his
own conclusion as that the word ‘*rājan*’ in the present context must
apply to *one on whom devolves the duty of protecting the people*;—which
is the first of the three views stated above.

See in this connection the *Aveṣṭyadhikaraṇa* (Mīmāṃsā-sūtra, 2.3.3.),
where the conclusion is that the word ‘*rājan*’ is rightly and directly
denotative of the *Kṣatriya*, and as the ‘protecting of the people’ is
prescribed in law-books as the duty of the *Kṣatriya*, this ‘protection’
has come to be called ‘*Rājya*’ (Kingship) the ‘function of the King’;
and thus when other castes are found, by chance, to perform this
function, they have the title ‘*rājā*’ applied to them only
metaphorically.—As for ‘anointment’, the *Tantravārtika* (Trans. p. 822)
remarks that this also is prescribed for the *Kṣatriya* only. (See in
this connection *Tantravārtika*, Trans. pp. 815-831, where the whole
subject is discussed in detail).

Though such is the conclusion of the Mīmāṃsakas, the commentators on
Manu are agreed that in the present context the term ‘*rājan*’ stands
for any one who performs such functions of the king as ‘protecting the
people’ and so forth. *Aparārka* combines the two views that it applies
to such *Kṣatriyas* as perform the function of protecting the people.

This verse is quoted in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 2 b).
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**सिद्धिस्** तु **परमा** राज्ञः स्वीकृतसर्वराजमण्डलस्यानन्तरं सकलमहीमण्डलाधिपत्ये सति निरतिशया धर्मार्थसुखत्रिवर्गाभ्युदयप्राप्तिर् अपरामात्यादिप्रकृतिसम्पत् ॥ ७.१ ॥

_तत्र सिद्धिम् अवेक्ष्येदम् उच्यते ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	I will declare the duties of kings, (and) show how a king should conduct himself, how he was created, and how (he can obtain) highest success.
</details>
