+++
title = "043 त्रैविद्येभ्यस् त्रयीम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From persons learned in the Threefold Science he shall learn the Triad; as also the ancient Science of Government, the Science of Reasoning and the Science of the Soul; and also the art of commerce from experts—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**विद्याम्** इति द्वितीयान्तपाठे "अधिगच्छेत्" (म्ध् ७.३९) इत्य् अनुषञ्ज्यनीयम् । समाप्तब्रह्मचर्यस्य राज्योपदेशात्[^४२] त्रय्यर्थाधिगमेन तन्निष्पत्तेर् अभ्यासार्थो ऽयम् उपदेशः । त्र्यवयवा विद्या त्रिविद्या, ताम् अधीयते **त्रैविद्याः**,** तेभ्यस् त्रयीम्** ऋग्वेदादिवेदत्रयं **विद्यात्** । संदिग्धेषु पदार्थेषु वेदेभ्यो निर्णयं कुर्यात् । तैः सह वेदार्थं चिन्तयेद् इति यावत् । न राजत्वाभिमानान् मदावलेपेन सर्वज्ञो ऽहम् इति बुद्ध्या संदिह्यमानान् अर्थान् उपेक्षेत ।


[^४२]:
     M G: sadyopadeśāt

- **दण्डनीतिं च** । दण्डविषया नीतिः । "दण्डो दमनम् इत्य् आहुः" (ग्ध् ११.२८), येन शत्रवः स्वप्रकृतयो विषयवासिनश् चान्यायकारिणो दम्यन्ते, स **दण्डो** ऽमात्यादिसंपत् । **नीतिस्** तस्य प्रयोजनं तत्र विधिः, तं शिक्षेत । तद्विद्भ्यश् चाणक्यादिग्रथविद्भ्यः । **शाश्वतीम्** इति स्तुतिः । यद्य् अपि दण्डनीत्याप्य् अस्य सर्वलोकः शक्यते ज्ञातुम्, अन्वयव्यतिरेकमूलत्वाद् अस्यार्थस्य, तथाप्य् अबुधबोधनार्थानि तानि शास्त्राणि, बुधानां च संवादार्थानीति, युक्तो दण्डनीतिशास्त्राधिगमः । 

- एवं **आन्वीक्षिक्य्** अपि तर्कविद्यार्थशास्त्रादिका । **आत्मविद्या** अध्यात्मविद्या । विशेषणविशेष्ये वा पदे । आत्मने या हितान्वीक्षिकी सा तर्काश्रया । तां शिक्षेत । सा ह्य् उपयुज्यते[^४३] व्यसनाभ्युदयोपरमचित्तसंक्षोभोपशमाय । या तु बौद्धचार्वाकादितर्कविद्या सा नातीव कृत्वा क्वचिद् उपयुज्यते । प्रत्युतास्तिक्यम् उपहन्ति, यो नातिनिपुणमतिः । यदा तु स्वतन्त्राम् आन्वीक्षिकीं वेद, तदा तस्य दूतसंवादादिषु वाक्यवैशद्यानाम् उपयोगो नोपहास्यो भवति । 


[^४३]:
     M G: tv upayujyate; DK: hy apayujyate (perhaps a typo)

- **वार्तारम्भांश् च** । पण्यानाम् अर्थपरिज्ञानं वाणिज्यकौशलम्, समयेन बार्हस्पत्येन तत्र परिज्ञानं वार्ता । तन्निमित्ता आरम्भा **वार्तारम्भाः** । वार्तास्वरूपं ज्ञात्वा तद्विषयकार्या[^४४] प्रवृत्तिर् आरम्भः । 


[^४४]:
     DK: -kāryāya

- एतल् लोकतो **विद्यात्** । वणिज्याजीवनो ऽत्र **लोको** ऽभिप्रेतः । ते हि तत्र कुशला भवन्ति । **लोकत** इति च पूर्वयोर् अनुषङ्गः कर्तव्यः । तेन सर्वत्र तद्विद्भ्य इति लभ्यते ॥ ७.४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If we read ‘*vidyām*’ with the Accusative ending (instead of ‘*vidyāt*’,
the Injunctive verb), it will have to be construed with ‘*Adhigacchet*’,
‘shall learn’ (of verse 39).

In as much as it is laid down that the King is to be anointed only after
he has passed through the stage of studentship, during which the Vedas
will have been already learnt,—the present injunction is to be taken as
pertaining to his continuing his study.

‘*The three-fold science*’ is that science which has three component
parts; and he who learns this is said to be ‘versed in the three-fold
science’;—from these he shall learn the ‘*Triad*’,—*i.e*., the three
Vedas, the Ṛk. and the rest. That is, in all doubtful matters, he shall
decide with the help of the Vedas; and he shall discuss the exact
meaning of Vedic texts with the said learned persons; end he ahull not
disregard knotty points thinking himself to be a powerful King and hence
influenced by pride and haughtiness.

‘*Also the Science of Government*’;—the science relating to ‘*daṇḍa*’,
and ‘*daṇḍa*’ is *ruling*, *governing*; that whereby enemies as also
people inhabiting his own kingdom, when doing wrong, are kept in check;
and this ‘governance’ consists in the employment of suitable ministers
&c. The ‘science’ of this consists of the rules pertaining to it. This
also he shall learn from persons versed in it, and knowing the works of
Cāṇakya and other writers.

‘*Ancient*’;—this is purely eulogistic.

Though with the help of the Science of Government alone he may be enable
to know the entire world, yet, in as much as that science is based upon
induction, and the Science of Reasoning serves the purpose of bringing
intelligence to the dull and corroboration to the intelligent,—it is
necessary to supplement the said science with the Science of Reasoning,
as also the Science of Politics and so forth; so also the Science of the
Soul.

Or the terms ‘*ānvīkṣikī*’ and ‘*ātmavidyā*’ may be construed together;
the meaning being—‘that Science of Reasoning which is beneficial to
one’s self’;—that he should learn; as it is only such beneficial science
that can be useful to him, in subjugating evil habits, misfortunes and
mental disturbances. As for the Science of Reasoning propounded by the
*Buddhas, the Carvākas* and other atheists, they cannot be of much use
to him; on the contrary, they are likely to shake his faith, if he does
not happen to be exceptionally intelligent.

When the king learns the Science of Reasoning by itself, then he becomes
capable of employing choice language in hie communications with
envoys;—so that he does not become open to ridicule.

‘*The Art of Commerce*’.—The acquiring of the knowledge of
market-commodities, and the knowledge of trade-methods, with the help of
Bṛhaspati’s work, constitutes ‘Commerce’: and activity pertaining
thereto constitutes the ‘Art of Commerce’; that ie, learning the
theories of commerce and then putting them into practice.

This he shall learn from ‘*experts*’—*i.e*., persons making a living by
trade; these alone are ‘experts’ in matters relating to commerce.

The term ‘*from experts*’ may be construd (construed?) with the two
preceding terms (‘Science of Reasoning’ and ‘Science of Soul’) also; so
that we get at the meaning that all these three are to be learnt from
men expert in them.—(43)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.310), which, reads
‘*ātmavidbhyo*’ (for ‘*ātmavidyām*’) and hence avoids the confusion felt
by the commentators on Manu;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 222), which
explains ‘*daṇḍanīti*’ as ‘*Arthaśāstra*’, ‘Science of
Polity’,—‘*vārtā*’ as ‘agriculture, commerce, cattle-tending and so
forth’,—and ‘*trayī*’ as ‘Ṛk, Yayuṣ and Sāman’;—in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Rājanīti, p. 118), which notes the reading ‘*vidyām*’, in which case,
it says, the whole is to be construed with ‘*adhigaccet*’ of verse
39;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, p. 36a);—and in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p.
6a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.3).—‘The king shall be fully instructed in the threefold
science and in Logic.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.310).—‘Fully instructed in Logic, in Political Science,
in Agricultural Science and in the Threefold Science (Vedas).’

*Arthaśāstra* (pp. 34-35).—‘The discipline of the sciences is obtained
through the authority of the professors of each; for the sake of this
discipline one should always remain in constant touch with those learned
in the sciences.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.59, 63, 66).—‘Association with the Preceptor bestows
knowledge of the scriptures; knowledge of the scriptures increases
humility. A king who is modest under culture never sinks under
calamities. A king well-versed in polity, practising self-control, very
soon attains to that shining pitch of prosperity that has been attained
by other divine kings. The Preceptor is worshipped for the acquisition
of learning; learning which has been mastered becomes instrumental in
enhancing the prudence of the illustrious; and the habit of acting by
prudence leads to prosperity.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.1 *et. seq*.)—‘The king after having controlled his
senses, should direct his attention to the cultivation of the following
branches of learning—*Ānvīkṣikī* (Logic), *Trayī* (Vedic Triad) *Vārtā*
(Trade-Agriculture) and *Daṇḍanīti* (Science of Government). The
followers of Manu hold that there are only three divisions of
learning—Vedic Triad, Trade-Agriculture, and Science of Government;
according to them Logie is only a branch of the Vedic Triad. The
followers of Bṛhaspati postulate only two divisions:—Agriculture and
Science of Government; as only these help men in acquiring wealth.
According to Uśanas the Science of Government is the only division; the
origin of all other forms of learning lies in this. But according to our
own teacher, there are four branches :—*Ānvīkṣikī* deals with the
knowledge of the self, *Trayī* with Dharma and Adharma (right and
wrong), *Vārtā* with the acquiring and spending of wealth, and
*Daṇḍanīti* with justice and injustice. *Ānvīkṣikī*, *Trayī* and *Vārtā*
are excellent forms of knowledge; but they are of no avail if
*Daṇḍanīti* is neglected.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 26).—‘Ānvīkṣikī (Philosophy), Trayī (Three Vedas),
Vārtā (Trade-Agriculture) and Daṇḍanīti (Science of Government) are the
Sciences;—according to the Mānavas, the Three Vedas, Trade-Agriculture
and Science of Government—Philosophy being only a part of the Three
Vedas; according to the Bārhaspatyas, Trade-Agriculture and Science of
Government—the Three Vedas being only a cover for the man who knows the
worldly affairs; the Science of Government is the only Science, say the
followers of Uśanas—the progress of all Sciences being centred therein;
there are four Sciences, says Kauṭilya; it is by means of these that one
can understand the methods of acquiring wealth and spiritual merit; it
is this that constitutes the essence of the Sciences. Sāṅkhya, Yoga and
Lokāyata constitute ‘Philosophy’; Merit and Demerit are dealt with in
the Three Vedas; Profit and Loss are dealt with in the Science of
Trade-Agriculture; Policy, good and bad, is dealt with in the Science of
Government.’

*Śukranīti* (1.303).—‘Logic, Three Vedas, Trade-Agriculture, and Science
of Government,—these four branches of learning the king shall always
study.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.21-22).—‘Knowledge of Polity, wise judgment, contentment,
skilfulness,...... good conduct and restraint of the passions...... are
the sources of all prosperity.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अधिगच्छेद् इति वर्तते । **त्रैविद्येभ्यो** वेदाधिगमस्योक्तत्वाद् ब्रह्मचार्यवस्थायाम् एव तदर्थाधिगमार्थो ऽयं पुनर् आरम्भः सामर्थ्याद् वेदितव्यः । अनधिगताधिगमार्थो वा व्रतस्नातकपक्षे दण्डनीत्युपदिदिक्षया वा पुनर् अस्योपदेशो दृष्टान्तार्थवादार्थः । एवं दण्डनीतिविद्भ्यो **दण्डनीतिम्** अधिगच्छेत् । **शाश्वतीम्** इति स्तुतिपरम् एतत् । दन्डनीतेर् वेदवद् [आनन्त्यं नास्ति] । यद्य् अपि च दण्डनीत्याश्रयं सर्वं शक्यते लोकतो ग्रहीतुम्, दृष्टोपायसाध्यत्वात् तस्य, तथाप्य् अबुद्धा न प्रतिपद्येरन्, बुद्धाश् च दण्डपातने नियमेन वर्तेरन् । लोभान् परित्यज्यादृष्टम् अस्याङ्कनम् अस्य विवासनम् । इयांश् च पुनर् अयम् अस्य दण्ड इतीष्यते च नियमो, दृष्टप्रयोजनत्वान् नियमस्मृतेः । अतो राज्ञा **दण्डनीतिर्** अवश्यम् अध्येतव्या । **आन्वीक्षिकीं चात्मविदां** तद्विद्भ्यः । एवं च सत्य् अयं तयाहिततत्त्वविज्ञानो ऽभ्युदयोपनिपातापक्रमकालेषु हर्षविषादविकारोपशमप्रयोजनम् अध्यात्मप्रसंख्यानम् अवाप्य न राज्यतन्त्रं परिहापयिष्यति । प्रज्ञावाक्यक्रियावैशारद्यं चास्या जायते, आन्वीक्षिक्यधिगमे तच् चास्यागमिके विधौ सामन्तदूतसंवादादिषु सप्रयोजनं भवति । **वार्तारंभांश् च** कोशोपचयहेतून् **लोकतो** **ऽधिगच्छेद्** इति वर्तते ॥ ७.४३ ॥

_आहितविद्याविनयश् चायं राजा प्रयत्नतः,_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

043	From those versed in the three Vedas let him learn the threefold (sacred science), the primeval science of government, the science of dialectics, and the knowledge of the (supreme) Soul; from the people (the theory of) the (various) trades and professions.
</details>
