+++
title = "045 दश काम-समुत्थानि"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall shun the ten ruinous vices springing from love of plea sure, as also the eight arising from anger.—(45)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इदम् अपरम् इन्द्रियजयोपदेशस्य प्रयोजनम् । अजितेन्द्रियस्य दुष्परिहराणि व्यसनानि । **दुरन्तानि**, दुःखकरः अन्तः अवसानं येषाम् । प्रथमं प्राप्तिकाले सुखयन्ति व्यसनानि, पश्चात् तु वैरस्यं जनयन्ति । ततो **दुरन्तान्य्** उच्यन्ते । अथ वा दुष्प्रापः अन्तः एषाम् । न हि व्यसनिनस् ततो निवर्तितुं शक्नुवन्ति । कामाद् धेतोः समुत्थानं जन्म येषाम् ॥ ७.४५ ॥

_एषाम् वर्जने प्रयोजनम् आह, गुरुलघुबावं च ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse adds a further reason for subjugating the senses.

One whose senses are not subdued cannot avoid the vices. ‘*Durantāni*’,
‘*Ruinous*’,—whose end is painful. In the beginning vices bring a
certain amount of pleasure, but afterwards they lead to *ruin*; hence
they are called ‘ruinous’.

Or the term ‘*durantāni*’ may mean *whose end cannot be got at*; *i.e*.,
people caught in a vice cannot escape from it.

Those that have their source in ‘love of pleasure’ are
railed^(‘)*Kāmasamuttha*’—(45)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 148);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 413) as describing the ‘vices’ which are to
be avoided by the king.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 7.45-53)  
**

*Kāmandaka* (1.54).—‘Hunting, gambling and drinking,—these are condemned
in a king. Behold the catastrophe that befell King Pāṇḍu, the king of
Niṣadha and the descendants of Vṛṣṇi, through indulgence in each of
these respectively. Lust, anger, avarice, fiendish delight in indicting
injury, morbid desire for honour, and arrogance—these six passions
should be avoided.’

Do. (1.65, 68).—‘A self-controlled king receives the highest homage.
Self-control is the ornament of kings. A self-controlled king appears as
beautiful as a gentle elephant shedding ichor. A powerful king without
practising self-control is subdued by his enemies without difficulty;
while a weak king practising self-control and observing the scriptural
injunctions never meets with defeat.’

Do. (11.12).—‘Women, intoxicating drinks, hunting, gambling and diverse
scourges of fate are called *vyasana*. One who is under the influence of
these *vyasanas* is the person against whom expedition should be
undertaken.’

Do. (14.65).—‘Beautiful women and drink may be enjoyed within the bounds
of moderation; but a learned king should never indulge in hunting and
gambling; for these are beset with graver dangers.’

*Śukranīti* (1.283).—‘Hunting, gambling and drinking are condemnable in
kings. Dangers from these are illustrated in the cases of Pāṇḍu, Nala
and Vṛṣṇi respectively... Sensuousness, anger, ignorance, cupidity, and
passion,—one should give up these. On giving up these the king becomes
happy.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.39).—‘A king, delighting in vile acts, and having eyes
blinded by sensuous objects, brings terrible catastrophe upon his own
head.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.50-52).—‘He should not take delight in hunting, dice, women
and drinking;—nor in defamation and assault; and he should not injure
his own property,’

*Śukranīti* (1.235).—‘Kings should not indulge in sensuousness with
regard to others’ wives, cupidity towards others’ wealth, and anger
towards his own subjects.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rāja, p. 146).—‘Hunting, drinking and
gambling, the king should avoid; kings addicted to these are ruined.
Sleeping during the day and purposeless roaming should be specially
avoided; he should not commit defamation or assault; the king shall also
avoid talking ill of people behind their back; he shall avoid the two
kinds of misuse of wealth, *viz*., misuse *of* wealth and misuse *by
means of* wealth; the misuse *of* wealth consists of the demolishing of
walls and the neglecting of forts, etc., and also of reckless
squandering; and misuse *by means of* wealth consists in making presents
at improper times and places and to improper persons. The king shall not
he very soft; as soft people are always ill-treated; nor shall he be
very hard; as people become disaffected with hard men; the king who is
soft at times and also hard at times, wins both worlds. The king shall
avoid joking with his dependants; dependants always ill-treat masters
given to jocular conversation. The king shall avoid all vices.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do., p. 149).—‘The king should not enter an unknown
crowd, or an unknown water, until it has been examined beforehand by
trustworthy persons; nor shall he ride on a wild elephant, or on an
untrained horse; he shall never visit an unknown woman, nor one in her
courses. He shall never enter an ill-constructed boat, nor one of which
the boats men have not been tested. He shall never disturb the
endowments made in favour of gods; nor any standing endowments. He shall
never confiscate the property of a Brāhmaṇa, which he shall always
respect.’

*Śukranīti* (1.215).—‘Indulgence in gambling, women and wine, when
undue, brings many disasters; within due limits, it brings wealth, sons
and intelligence.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, p. 414).—‘He shall renounce all
vices, specially the seven root ones. He shall protect himself against
enemies, by guarding his secrets from going out. The king shall keep
himself controlled by his position, prosperity, ruin, knowledge and the
six qualities; and never by desires. First of all he shall know himself,
then his ministers, then his dependants, and lastly all the citizens;
when this has been done, then alone shall he go against his enemies.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 39).—‘By subjugating the six-fold group of enemies he
shall acquire sense-control; by associating with elders, he shall
acquire wisdom; through the spy, he shall obtain vision; by action,
security of life and property; by controlling the activities of people,
he shall secure attention to the special functions of each man: by the
teaching of sciences, discipline; by the proper use of wealth,
prosperity, Having acquired sense-control, he shall shun others’ women,
others’ wealth and also injury to beings; also over-addiction to sleep,
fickleness, untruthfulness, too showy appearance, and misuse of wealth;
also all improper and illegal proceedings.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कामक्रोधसमुत्थयोर् दुःखयोर् उपन्यासस् त्यागार्थः, कामक्रोधपरित्यागेन । तत्त्यागश् चेन्द्रियजयेनेत्य् उक्तम् । बलाबलम् अधुना व्यसनवर्गस्योच्यते, आदरार्थम् । कथं नामायं गुरुतरं व्यसनवर्गम् आदरेण जह्यात् ॥ ७.४५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

045	Let him carefully shun the ten vices, springing from love of pleasure, and the eight, proceeding from wrath, which (all) end in misery.
</details>
