+++
title = "054 मौलाञ् शास्त्रविदः"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall appoint seven or eight ministers, with respectable status, versed in law, of heroic temperament, experienced in business, born of noble families, and thoroughly tested.—(54)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^५६]:
     M G: prakurvīta parīkṣitān


[^५५]:
     M G J DK (4: 1250): cāṣṭau, but the commentary reads vā.

पितृपितामहान्वयागता बहुसुतधनबान्धवाः प्रकटगोभूमिधनास् तद्देशवासिनो **मौलाः** । मूलं प्रतिष्ठा, तत्र भवा **मौलाः** । **शास्त्रविदः** । शास्त्रं शासनं भृत्यविज्ञानम्[^५७] । तेनान्ये ऽपि गुणा गृह्यन्ते । तद् यथा- "प्राज्ञः दृढकारी धारयिष्णुर् दक्षः वाग्मी प्रबलः[^५८] प्रतिपत्तिमान् उत्साहप्रभावयुक्तः क्लेशसहः शुचिर् दानशीलः योग्यसत्त्वयुक्तः स्तंभचापलहीनः प्रियो वैरिणाम् अकर्ता" (च्ड़्। कश् १.९.१) इति । **शूर**शब्देन राजकार्ये शरीरकलत्रापत्यधनादिष्व् अपि निरपेक्ष उच्यते । तथा मरणे ऽभीरुः, युद्धोत्साही, एक एव परिभवभयाद् बहुभिर् विरुध्यते, दृढप्रहारी बलवान् । **लब्धलक्षाः** । परिदृष्टकर्मताम् अनेनाह । दृष्टखड्गव्यापाराः कृतार्थाधिकाराः अनुभूतमन्त्रिभूमयः । **कुलोद्गतान्** कुलांकुशनिगृहीता ह्य् अकार्ये न वर्तन्ते । **सचिवान्** सहायान् । नित्यम् एते राज्ञः पार्श्ववर्तिनो भवेयुः । **सप्त वाष्टौ वा** । नियमो ऽयम् । येन चाल्प एकचित्ता भवन्ति । ततश् च राजमन्त्र उद्घाटिकः[^५९] स्यात् । बहूनाम् अपि मन्त्रभेदः । तस्माद् एतावन्त एव कर्तव्याः । **सुपरीक्षितान्** धर्मार्थकामभयोपधाभिः । सेयं परीक्षोच्यते । पुरोहितः — स्वल्पकार्ये राज्ञा व्याजेनाधिक्षिप्तः बहुनार्थसंप्रदानेनाप्तपुरुषैर् एकैकम् अमात्यम् उपजपेत् राजविनाशाय- "एतच् च सर्वमन्त्रिभ्यो[^६०] रोचते, अथ कथं भवते" इति । प्रत्याख्याने धर्मोपधाशुद्धः । सेनापतिः — केनचिद् उपदेशेन पूर्ववद् अधिक्षिप्तः[^६१] बहुना च संप्रदानेनाप्तपुरुषैर् एकैकम् अमात्यम् उपजपेद् राजविनाशाय- "एतच् च सर्वमन्त्रिभ्यो रोचते, अथ कथं भवते" इति । प्रत्याख्यान अर्थोपधाशुद्धः । परिव्राजिका अन्तःपुरे[^६२] लब्धविश्वासा एकैकम् अमात्यम् उपजपेत् — "सा राजमहिषी भवन्तं कामयते कृतसमागमोपया" इति । प्रत्याख्ह्याने कामोपधाशुद्धः । राजप्रयुक्ता एव केचित् पुरुषाः प्रवादम्[^६३] आविष्कुर्युः- "कृतसमयैर् अमात्यै राजा हन्यते" इति । उपलब्धप्रवादः[^६४] पुरोहितस्याप्तः कश्चिद् अमात्येषु मन्त्रं श्रावयेत्- "इमं प्रवादम् उपश्रुत्य भवतां निग्रहो राज्ञा क्रियते" इति । तेषाम् एव चान्यतमः पूर्वम् एव कृतसंवित्कः प्रत्येकं राजामात्येषूत्साहयेत् । तत्र ये प्रत्याचक्षते ते भयोपधाशुद्धाः ।


[^६४]:
     M G: -pramādaḥ


[^६३]:
     M G: pramādam


[^६२]:
     M G: parivrājikāntaḥpure


[^६१]:
     M G: avikṣiptaḥ


[^६०]:
     M G: sarvaṃ


[^५९]:
     M G 1st ed.: udghāṭakaḥ; G 2nd ed.: udghaṭanaṃ


[^५८]:
     KAŚ (1.9.1) and Bhāruci read: pragalbhaḥ, which is probably the original reading.


[^५७]:
     M G: bhṛtyavidhijñānaṃ

- <u>अथ वा</u> **मौल्ंआस्** तावत् कुर्याद् अर्थसमाहर्तृसंनिधातॄन्[^६५] । ये अर्थं ग्रामेभ्यः समाहरन्ति, समाहृतं च रक्षन्ति विनियुञ्जते च । सर्वथार्थव्यवहारिणो **मौलाः** कर्तव्या इत्य् उक्तं भवति । **शास्त्रविद्ः** बुद्धिसचिवा मन्त्रिणः । **शूरान्** बलाध्यक्षान् । **लब्धलक्षान्** इत्यादि सर्वेषां विशेषणम् । एकैकस्य समुदितपरीक्षा च योक्ता राजविषया[^६६] राजामात्येषूत्साहनम् इति, सा न युक्तेति मन्यन्ते । एष एव हि बुद्धिभेदो भवेद् अमात्यानाम् । तस्माद् अन्या काचित् स्त्री साध्वी प्रयोज्या अन्यश् च विनाशविषय उदाहार्यः ॥ ७.५४ ॥


[^६६]:
     DK (4: 1251) suggests reading: rājamahiṣīviṣayā rājaviṣayā ca


[^६५]:
     M G J: arthapramādakartṛsaṃnidhātṝn; I follow the conjecture of DK (4: 1250) representing the KAŚ vocabulary and the reading in MDh 7.60.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Of respectable status*’;—hereditary servants of the king, possessed of
many children, and relations and much wealth, openly possessing vast
numbers of cattle and landed property, inhabitants of the kingdom.
‘*Mūla*’ is *status*; and those possessed of status are ‘*maula*’.

‘*Versed in law*’;—‘*śāstra*’ is *law, ordinance*; the law regulating
the conduct of servants; hence the term indicates other qualifications
also; such as—intelligent, of firm resolve, capable of much hard labour,
clever, eloquent, strong, respectable, endowed with courage and energy,
able to bear hardships, pure, liberal, equipped with estimable
character, free from both tardiness and fickleness, loved by men, not
prone to making enemies.

The term ‘*śūra*’, ‘*of heroic temperament*’, indicates one who, in his
zeal for the king’s work, takes no account of his body, life, children
or wealth, and also also not afraid of death, ever ready for battle, and
though alone, he is ever ready to engage in a fight with many
persons,—capable of striking hard, possessed of strength.

‘*Experienced in business*’;—this indicates the fact of their having
seen much work; those who have actually fought with the sword, who have
successfully accomplished their duties, who have had previous experience
in ministerial work.

‘*Born of noble families*;’—when people are moved by considerations of
their noble family, they desist from improper acts.

‘*Ministers*’— assistants.

These should always remain at the king’s side.

‘*Seven or eight*’—This is a restrictive rule; fewer than these are
likely to combine,—and this would render the king’s consultations
one-sided. On the other hand, if they are too many, there is likely to
be great diversities of opinion. Hence only seven or eight ministers are
to be appointed.

‘*Thoroughly tested*”—This refers to tests relative to (*a*) virtue,
(*b*) wealth, (*c*) love and (*d*) fear. For instance, (*a*) The Priest,
under the pretext of having been reprimanded in his work, by the king,
should approach each of the ministers with large presents sent through
trustworthy messengers, with proposals purporting to bring about the
king’s ruin, saying—‘this proposal has been approved by all the
ministers, how does it appear to you?’—If the minister thus approached,
repudiates the suggestion, he has been ‘tested with the test of
virtue.’—(*b*) The army—commander, under a similar pretext of having
been reprimanded, may approach one of the ministers with large presents
sent through trusted messengers, suggesting proposals for bringing about
the king’s ruin, saying—‘this has been approved by all ministers, what
do you think of it?’—If the minister should repudiate the suggestion, he
becomes ‘tested with the test of wealth.’ (*c*) A female ascetic who is
trusted in the king’s harem, shall approach each of the ministers,
saying—‘such and such a queen is in love with you and has made
arrangements for meeting you.’ If the man repudiates the suggestion, he
becomes ‘tested with the test of love.’—(*d*) Some persons, urged by the
king himself, should give out the rumour that ‘the king is being killed
by certain ministers who have made a combination against him’; having
heard this numour (rumour?), a trusted man in the priest’s employ should
suggest to the ministers the following plan—‘on hearing this rumour the
king is going to punish you’; one of these men, having previously
entered into the plan, should approach each of the ministers and urge
them to activity; the ministers who repudiate this suggestion become
‘tested with the test of fear.’

Or, he shall appoint such ministers of finance as are ‘*maula*’ *i.e*.,
capable of collecting and guarding and rightly spending wealth; that is,
those who collect wealth from the villages, and carefully keep and
rightly spend what has been collected. The meaning thus is that he shall
appoint such finance ministers as are experts in money-matters.—‘*Versed
in lavs*’— the councillors that he appoints should be learned.—The
army-commanders that he appoints should be ‘*of heroic temperament*.’
‘*Experienced*’ and the other epithets qualify each of those mentioned
above.

Some people hold that the ‘testing’ of ministers, in the manner related
above, is not the right thing to do; they hold that such testing may
actually produce unfaithful feelings in the minds of the ministers.
Hence some other faithful woman (than the queen herself) should be
employed (in the test); and the intrigue too should he proposed against
some other person than the King himself.—(54)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Labdhalakṣān*’—‘Experienced’ (Medhātithi);—‘who fail not in their
undertakings’ (Govindarāja, Nandana and Rāghavānanda);—‘skilled in the
use of weapons.’

‘*Suparīkṣitān*’—‘Tried through temptations’ (Medhātithi);—‘tried as to
incorruptibiliy’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘tested by spies’ (Govindarāja);—‘bound to
fidelity by oath, by touching the images of gods and such sacred objects
(Kullūka and Rāghavānandà).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.311) to the effect that the
king should appoint seven or eight councillors;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra p. 405);—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 177), which explains,
‘*labdhalakṣān*’ as ‘*paridṛṣtakarmaṇaḥ*’, ‘who have seen action’,
*i.e*., ‘experienced’;—in *Nītimayūkha* (p. 61), which explains
‘*labdhalakṣān*’ as ‘clever’,—‘*maulān*’ as ‘hereditary’;—and in
*Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 9b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 7.54-55)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (3.71).—‘He shall appoint ministers to help him in his affairs,
who are pure, free from covetousness, attentive and able.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.310-311),—‘He shall appoint ministers who are
intelligent, hereditarily connected, firm and pure; with these he shall
take counsel; as also with the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 175).—‘He shall appoint such
assistants for himself as are brave, of noble family, strong, endowed
with wealth, beauty, nobility and other good qualities, self-controlled,
endowed with forgiveness, capable of hard work, courageous, knowing the
duty, of sweet speech,

capable of offering salutary advice and devoted to their master.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 175).—‘The attendants of
the king shall he gentle, high-born, brave, equipped with knowledge,
free from jealousy, not mean, pure and clever.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.).—‘The king should appoint only such ministers as are
able and have been duly tested.’

Do. (*Rājadharma*) (Do., p. 177).—‘The king shall honour that minister
who is grateful, intelligent, free from meanness, firmly devoted to him,
firm in his duty and firmly grounded in political science.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 178).—‘The king shall appoint as ministers,
counsellors, ambassadors, priests, judge and members of the
assembly,—such people as may he devoted to his welfare and safety.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—The king shall appoint as his minister a Brāhmaṇa,
noble-born and devoted to the king, expert in his business.’

*Śukranīti* (2.106-109).—‘The king shall examine his officers with
reference to their work, companionship, merit, habits, family-relations
and other things; and place confidence in those that are found
trustworthy.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 174).—‘Immediately after his
anointment, the king shall proceed to select his assistants; even an
undertaking that is easy is difficult to he accomplished by a single
man, especially when one who has no assistant; how much more is the work
of the king which involves great issues! Therefore the king shall
himself select assistants born of noble families.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 41).—‘He shall appoint as ministers such persons as
have been his fellow-students; as he is cognisant of the purity of their
character, and hence has trust in them; so says Bharadvāja. This is
denied by Viśālākṣa, who holds that as these men have sported with him,
they are likely to disregard him; hence as ministers he should appoint
such men as share his secrets; because such men have the same habits and
defects as himself; as these men knowing that the king knows their
secrets will never misbehave towards him. Parāśara holds that this
objection is common to both; the king also knowing that they know his
secrets, will follow them in their acts of commission and omission;
hence he should appoint as ministers such persons as might have helped
him in dangerous situations; because their attachment to him has been
actually seen. Piśuna denies this; the feeling here mentioned is an
emotion, it is not a lasting quality of the mind; hence the king should
appoint as ministers such persons as have, in actual practice, been
found to have acted in strict accordance with orders; because the
quality of these will have been actually perceived. This again is denied
by Kauṇapadanta; because even these men would not be endowed with other
qualities necessary in ministers; therefore he shall appoint as
ministers such persons as have been hereditary ministers, because the
antecedents of such men are fully known; they will not abandon him even
though ill-treated, because of the hereditary relationship. This is
denied by Vātavyādhi, on the ground that such men would arrogate to
themselves all the powers of the master and would behave as such;
therefore be shall appoint as ministers such persons as are well-versed
in political science and are strangers; strangers would regard the king
as holding the rod of chastisement and would never misbehave. This is
denied by Bāhudantī-putra, on the ground that a man, though possessing
theoretical knowledge, if devoid of practical experience, would come to
grief; hence he should appoint as ministers such persons as are endowed
with the qualities of nobility of birth, wisdom, purity, bravery and
loyalty. All these opinions are right, says Kauṭilya; but the real
character of men can he ascertained only from actual experience; hence
the king shall examine the ministerial capacity of the persons
concerned, the exigencies of time and place, and also the nature of the
work in hand and then appoint them as *ministers*, not as the *chief
minister*.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.27-30).—‘*Upadhās* are the means of testing honesty, and
by these the king should test his dependants. A person who has got a
good many friends to deter him from the paths of vice, who is not a
foreigner by birth, who possesses noble lineage and character and great
physical strength, who is eloquent and audacious in speech and is
farsighted, energetic and ready-witted, who is free from obstinacy and
fickleness and is faithful to his friends, who is painstaking and pure
and truthful, who is blessed with equanimity, cheerfulness, patience,
gravity and health, who is a master of all the arts, dexterous, prudent
and retentive, unswerving in his devotion, and not prone to avenge the
wrongs done to him by his sovereign,—such a person should be selected as
the minister. Accuracy of memory, exclusive devotion to the ways and
means and the Empire, grave consideration of the *pros* and *cons* of a
question, unerring judgment, firmness, and observance of secrecy
regarding all counsels,—these are the necessary qualifications of a
minister.’

Do. (11.61).—‘A mantra or counsel consists of five parts: supports,
means to ends, divisions of time and place, averting of calamities and
final success.’

Do. (11.74).—‘Manu says twelve, Bṛhaspati says sixteen, and Uśanas says
twenty, ministers should form a cabinet.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 48).—‘Accompanied by the Chief Minister and the
Domestic Priest, he shall, in the first instance, appoint ministers to
unimportant posts, and there test them by means of tests.’

Do. (p. 76).—‘The cabinet of ministers shall consist of twelve—say the
followers of Manu; sixteen, say the followers of Bṛhaspati; twenty, say
the followers of Uśanas; the number shall depend on the king’s own
capacity, says Kauṭilya.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_यस्मात्_,
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

054	Let him appoint seven or eight ministers whose ancestors have been royal servants, who are versed in the sciences, heroes skilled in the use of weapons and descended from (noble) families and who have been tried.
</details>
