+++
title = "056 तैः सार्धम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With these he shall always discuss all ordinary business relating to peace and war, as also the ‘state’, the sources of revenue, the means of protection, and the consolidation of what has been acquired.—(56)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तैर्**[^७१] बुद्धिसचिवैर् मुख्यैश् चार्थाधिकारिभिः सह **सामान्यं** यन् नातिरहस्यं तच् **चिन्तयेत् संधिविग्रहम्**- "किं संधिः संप्रति युक्तो ऽथ विग्रहः," उभयत्र गुणदोषान् विचारयेत् । इदं कर्तव्यावधारणं तु स्वबुद्ध्या कुर्याद् यथास्य परप्रयोज्यता न भवति । 


[^७१]:
     DK (4: 1772) notes that this commentary is quite corrupt. See Bhāruci's commentary on this verse, which is followed by Medhātithi.

- इदं चापरं चिन्तयेत्, **स्थानम्** । तच् चतुर्विधम्- दण्डकोशपुरराष्ट्राणि । तत्र दण्डो हस्त्यश्वरथपदातयः । तेषां प्रतिकर्म पोषणरक्षणादि चिन्त्यम्[^७२] । न ह्य् असमाधानं प्रधानम्[^७३] । तथा कोशस्य हेमरूप्यबाहुल्यं प्रचुररूप्यता आयव्ययलक्षणं च । कोशस्य यानि यान्य् आयस्थानानि[^७४] तानि न व्ययितव्यानि न विलम्बनीयानि भृत्यानाम् । तथा राष्ट्रस्य देशपर्यायस्य स्वाजीव आत्मसंधारणः परसंधारणो[^७५] नदीवृक्षाः[^७६] पशव्यः[^७७] शत्रुद्वेषक्रान्तप्रायः[^७८] गुप्तगोचरः[^७९] पशुमान् अदेवमातृकः, आपदि च दण्डकरसह[^८०] इत्येवमादि । पुरस्य वक्ष्यति "तत् स्याद्[^८१] आयुधसंपन्नम्" (म्ध् ७.७५) इति । 


[^८१]:
     M G: tasmād


[^८०]:
     M G J DK: daṇḍakaragraha (I follow Bhāruci)


[^७९]:
     M G J DK: guptigocaraḥ


[^७८]:
     Bhāruci reads: śatrudveśi (ī?) sītāprāyaḥ


[^७७]:
     M G J DK: paśavaḥ


[^७६]:
     Bhāruci reads here: svārakṣyaḥ


[^७५]:
     M G J DK: ātmasaṃdhāraṇaṃ parasaṃdhāraṇena (I follow Bhāruci)


[^७४]:
     M G J: yāni nyāyasthānāni


[^७३]:
     M G add: ca


[^७२]:
     M G: cintyapratikarma

- <u>अथ वा</u> **स्थानं** स्वदेशाच् चाप्रच्यवनम् । एवं **समुदायो** ऽपि चिन्त्यः । तत्र कृषिर् व्रजगुलमस्थानानि वाणिज्यशुल्कदण्ड[^८२] इत्य् एवमादि । **गुप्तिं** स्वराष्ट्रगतां वक्ष्यति । **लब्धप्रशमनं** च देवताश्रमविद्यावतां[^८३] धार्मिकाणां च मानदानत्यागायोगः, उचितानां[^८४] चाभ्यनुज्ञानम् । सर्वबन्धनमोक्षः । अनुग्रहो दीनव्याधितानाम् । उत्सवानां चापूर्वाणां प्रवर्तनम्, प्रवृत्तानाम् अनुवृत्तिः । 


[^८४]:
     M G: avitānāṃ; J DK: uditānāṃ


[^८३]:
     M G: devatāsamaṃ vidyāvatāṃ


[^८२]:
     M G: vāṇijyam uktadaṇḍa

- यच् च कोशदण्डोपघातकम्[^८५] अधार्मिकचरित्रं तद् अपनीय धर्मव्यवहारान् स्थापयेत् । अधर्मचारित्रम् अकृतम् अन्यस्य कृतं वान्यैः प्रवर्तयेत् । न वा धर्मकृतं चान्यैर् निवर्तयेद् इति । 


[^८५]:
     M G J DK -daṇḍopādhikam; see Bhāruci and KAŚ 13.5.14 for the reading adopted.

- एवं **स्थाना**दीनि चिन्त्यानि ॥ ७.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

With the aforesaid councillors and finance-ministers he shall discuss
the ‘*ordinary business*’— what may not be of a very confidential
nature—‘*relating to peace and war*’; he shall consider *peace and war*;
he shall consider the pros and cons of both sides of the question as to
whether on a certain occasion peace or war would be the right course to
adopt. But the actual decision he should take himself; so that he may
not appear to have been guided by other persons.

He should also discuss the ‘*state*’; this is fourfold, consisting of
Army, Treasure, City and Kingdom. Of these the ‘*Army*’ consists in
Elephants, Horses, Chariots and Footsoldiers; and he shall discuss such
things relating to them as maintenance, protection, and the appointment
of proper commanders as regards the *Treasury*, it should abound in gold
and silver in large quantities, which should not be spent; the cardinal
parts of the Treasury shall never be expended; nor should payments to
servants be delayed;—as regards the *Kingdom*, which is the same as
*country*, it should be maintained intact against encroachment by
others, by the careful looking after of rivers and trees and cattle, the
building of protective works against possible attacks by enemies; it
should not be allowed to depend entirely on rain, and in times of
distress special penalties and taxes shall be levied (?);—as regards the
*City*, the methods of guarding it are going to be described under 7.75.

Or, ‘*sthāna*’, ‘*state*’, may mean not deviating from its own position.

Similarly he shall also discuss the ‘*sources of revenue*’—such as
agriculture, pastures, barriers, trade, fines and so forth.

‘*Means of protection*’,— of the king’s own kingdom, as going to be
described later on.

‘*Consolidation of what has been acquired*’;—the honouring of learned
and pious men and the continuance of bounties to them, the granting of
fresh bounties; and the removal of all restraints; merciful treatment of
the poor and the diseased; the instituting of fresh public sports and
rejoicings and the continnance (continuance?) of those already in vogue.
He shall put a stop to all abuses regarding the Treasury and judicial
procedure, and introduce sounder methods of work. If there is some
improper act done by others he shall stop it; but he shall not interfere
with any righteons (righteous?) act that may be done by others.

In this manner ‘*State*’ and the rest shall be discussed.—(56).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sthānam*’—‘Halting’ (Nandana).—Buhler misrepresents Medhātithi when he
attributes to him the alternative explanation of *sthāna* as ‘loss of
his Kingdom’, in reality Medhātithi says ‘stability of the Kingdom’ as
rightly understood by Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Virāmitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 316), which adds
the following notes:—*Taiḥ*, ‘with the said councillors,—*chintayet*,
‘the. King should deliberate,’—*sandhiḥ*, ‘alliances’—*vigrahaḥ*,
‘declaration of war’,—*sthānam*, ‘consisting of the four factors of the
army, treasury, capital city and Kingdom’,—‘*samudayaḥ*,’ ‘agriculture,
pastures, outposts, traders, cattle, customs, fines and so
forth,’—*guptiḥ*, protection of his Kingdom,—*labdhapraśamanam*,
‘bestowing of honours and gifts upon temples, hermitages and learned
men’;—the meaning of the phrase *sāmānyam sandhivigraham* is that he
should discuss questions of peace and war in general, the detailed and
specific details being discussed in connection with the ‘*ṣāḍguṇya*.’

It is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 405) and in
*Rājanītiratnākara*;—(p. 10b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (1-311).—‘With the ministers the king shall take counsel;
specially with the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 45).—‘The following are the qualities of the Chief
Minister: He should have been born and bred in the kingdom, of noble
birth, having a large family, versed in the arts, with keen powers of
perception, intelligent, possessed of a retentive memory, clever,
eloquent, bold, quick-witted, endowed with courage and influence,
capable of hard work, pure, sympathetic, firmly loyal, equipped with
character, strength, health and patience, devoid of haughtiness and
fickleness, of prepossessing appearance and never likely to create
enmities. The king shall therefore examine the land of birth and family
of the candidates for Chief Ministership; the exact amount of their
knowledge of arts and sciences he shall find out from other persons
learned in the same; their intelligence, memory and cleverness he shall
find out from actual experience; eloquence he shall find out from his
conversations; as also lowness and quickness of wit; courage and
influence shall be found out in times of trouble; purity, sympathy and
loyalty from actual experience; character, strength, health and patience
from their neighbours; and prepossessing appearance from direct
perception.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 71).—‘All operations should be preceded by due
discussion among Ministers.’

*Kāmandaka* (13.23).—‘The functions of the *Prakritimaṇḍala* are the
following:—To hold counsels, to secure the results of counsels, to
direct others to perform their functions, to ascertain the effects of
coming events, to look after income and expenditure, to administer
justice, to subjugate enemies, to avert threatening evils and
calamities, to protect the kingdom,—those are the functions of the
minister. But the minister who is subject to the *vyasanas* fails in all
this.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तैः सह संधिव्ग्रहादौ षाड्गुण्ये सामान्यं गुणदोषबलाबलं विचारयेत् । स नातिरहस्यम् । यत् त्व् इदं कर्तव्यावधारणं परमरहस्यं तत् स्वचित्तेनैव व्यवस्येत् । एवम् अस्य राज्ञः परप्रणेयता न भवति । किं चान्यत् **स्थानं तैस् सार्धं चिन्तयेद्** इति वर्तते । तत् पुनश् चतुर्विधम्- दण्डकोशपुरराष्ट्राणि । तत्र दण्डो हस्त्यश्वरथपदातयः । तेषां प्रतिकर्मपोषणरक्षणादि चिन्त्यम् । तथा कोशस्य हेमरूप्यबाहुल्यम् आयव्ययरक्षणानि च चिन्त्यानि । तथा राष्ट्रस्य देशप्रयायस्य स्वाजीव आत्मसंधारणः परसंधारणो, आपदि स्वारक्ष्यः, पशव्यः शत्रुद्वेषि सीताप्रायो गुप्तगोचरः, पशुमान् अदेवमातृकः, आपदि च दण्डकरसह इत्य् एवमादि चिन्त्यम् । पुरस्य वक्ष्यति- तत् स्याद् आयुधसंपन्न इत्य् एवमादि ।


अथ वा **स्थानं** स्वदेशाद् अप्रच्यवनम् । एवं समुदयाश् चिन्त्याः । ते च कृषिर् व्रजो गुल्मस्थानं वणिक्पथः शुल्कदण्ड इत्य् एवमादयः । **गुप्तिं** स्वराष्ट्रगतां वक्ष्यति । **लब्धप्रशमनानि** देवताश्रमविद्व्यावतां धार्मिकाणां च शूराणां च दानमानत्यागायोगः । उचितानां चाभ्यनुज्ञानम् । सर्वबन्धनमोक्षः । अनुग्रहो दीनानाथव्याधितानाम् । उत्सवानां चापूर्वाणां प्रव[र्तनं, प्रवृत्तानाम् अनुवृत्तिः । यच् च कोश]दण्डोपघातकम् अधार्मिकं वा चारित्रं तद् अपनीय धर्मव्यवहारं स्थापयेत् । आह च- "चारित्रम् [अकृतं धर्म्यं कृतं चान्यैः प्रवर्तयेत्, प्रवर्तयेन् न चाधर्म्यं कृतं चान्यैर् निवर्तयेत्" इति । एवं] स्थानादीनि चिन्त्यानि ॥ ७.५६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

056	Let him daily consider with them the ordinary (business, referring to) peace and war, (the four subjects called) sthana, the revenue, the (manner of) protecting (himself and his kingdom), and the sanctification of his gains (by pious gifts).
</details>
