+++
title = "063 दूतञ् चैव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As ambassador he shall appoint one who is well versed in all the sciences, who understands hints, expressions and gestures, who is honest, expert and born of a noble family.—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

दूतस्यायम् अधिको गुणः **इङ्गिताकारचेष्टज्ञता** । परविषये राज्ञो[^९१] मन्त्रिणां च संधित्सताम् **इङ्गितानि** दूतस्यादरेण संपरिग्रहः, विश्वसनम्, मुहुर् मुहुः संपूर्णतद्वाक्यस्य तस्य चाभिनन्दनम् । एतानि विपर्यस्तान्य् उपेक्षेत । **आकारः**[^९२] शरीरवैकृत्यं म्लानिर् मुखस्य वर्णवैकृत्यं तूष्णींभावो दीर्घोष्णनिःश्वासता । एवमादिविकारैर् दैन्यं सूचयति- "अस्ति काचिद् आपदस्य तेनायं विवर्णः" इति । वाक्यवैशारद्यम्, शारीरसंस्कारः, प्रसन्नमुखता, एवमादि हर्षं सूचयति । **शुचिः**[^९३] स्त्रीगते ऽर्थे गमनविशेषैः । यतः स्त्रीसंबन्धे मन्त्रभेदः परिभवश् च ॥ ७.६३ ॥


[^९३]:
     M G: śuci-


[^९२]:
     M G: ākāra-


[^९१]:
     M G: rājñe
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For the Ambassador the further qualification is necessary,—that he
should be able to understand ‘*hints, expressions and gestures*’. When
the Ambassador goes to another king and the latter is deliberating with
his ministers on questions of peace, there pass among them certain
signs; for instance, the Ambassador is received with studied regard, he
is confided in, his entire speeches are frequently praised. \[All these
he shall take note of.\] But of unfavourable signs he shall take no
notice.

‘*Expressions*’—bodily changes; such as dejected looks, paleness of the
face, silence, heaving of sighs, long and hot;—such bodily changes
indicate humility, and the clever ambassador infers from these that ‘the
man has fallen in some dire calamity, that is why he is pale’. On the
other hand, when the man talks glibly, his body wears a bloom, the face
is happy,—it shows that he is pleased.

‘*Honest*’—in his dealings with women; (this is necessary) since it is
through women that secrets generally become divulged and men fall into
disgrace.—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 188), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Sarvaśāstraviśāradam*’, ‘expert in several
sciences, scriptural as well as temporal’;—‘*iṅgitam*’, ‘words and
accents indicative of people’s intentions’,—‘*ākāraḥ*’, ‘joyous or pale
expression of the face, indicative of joy or grief’;—‘*ceṣṭā*’, ‘such
actions as the throwing about of the arms and so forth, which are
indicative of anger and other emotions’;—the man appointed should know
all these.

This verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 225);—and in
*Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 28b).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 7.63-64)  
**

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 180).—‘The ambassador should
he one who is truthful, conversant with dialects, eloquent, capable of
endurance, sweet of speech, possesses knowledge of countries and their
divisions, as also of time and its divisions; he should be one who
acquaints himself with places and things and reports what he knows to
the king at the right time.’

*Garuḍa-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 180).—‘Intelligent,
thoughtful, capable of gauging.the minds of others, hard-hearted,
truthful,—such should be the ambassador of the king.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Lakṣaṇa, p. 226).—‘High-born, polite,
eloquent, clever, sweet of speech, truthful, of bright complexion,—these
seven qualities should mark out the ambassador.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Lakṣaṇa, p. 226).—(Same as the
Matsya-purāṇa above.)

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 78).—‘After having completed the consultation, he
shall send out ambassadors. The ambassador should be endowed with all
the qualities of the minister, if the entire business is to be confided
to him; and if he is possessed of only three quarters of these
qualities, only a part of the business shall be confided to him; and if
he is possessed of only half of those qualities, then he shall only
carry orders (without knowledge of the secrets).’

*Kāmandaka* (12.1).—‘Having previously held the necessary counsel, the
wise king shall depute to the court of the monarch against whom he
intends to march, an ambassador, confident of his special abilities,—his
selection having been approved by the cabinet.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**दूतो** ऽमात्यगुणसंपदुपेतः कार्यः, **सर्वशास्त्रविशारदो**पदेशात् । इमाश् **चेङ्गिताकारचेष्टा** दूतेनावश्यं वेदितव्याः । परविषये राज्ञः । तत्र संधित्सत इमानीङ्गितानि दूतस्यादरेण सम्प्[अरिग्रहः, विश्वसनम्, मुहुः संपूजनम्, तद्वाक्यस्य चानसूयाभिनन्दनम् । एतान्य् एव विपर्यस्तानि विजिघृक्षतः । **आकारः** खलु शरीरगतः, म्लानमुखता वर्णविपर्ययः । तूष्णींभावो दीर्घोष्णनिश्वासादिः शरीरविकारो दैन्यं सूचयति । प्रसन्नमुखता वाक्यवैशारद्यं शरीरसंस्कार इत्य् एवमादि हर्षम् सूचयति । चेष्टासु कर्मस्व् अनभ्युत्थानं दैन्यम् आविष्करोति कार्यव्यापद्विषादानुगतम्, अभ्युत्थानं पुनर् हर्षं विपर्यये । **शुचित्वम्** अस्य दूतस्य स्त्रीगते ऽर्थगते [च] । स च विशेषेणोपदिश्यते । स्त्रीसंबन्धे मन्त्रभेदः परिभवश् चार्थग्रहणे कार्यहानिः । **कुलोद्गत**प्रयोजनम् उक्तम् ॥ ७.६३ ॥

_कस्य पुनर् हेतोर् आदरेण दूतलक्षणम् इदं कथ्यते, यस्मात् ।_
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

063	Let him also appoint an ambassador who is versed in all sciences, who understands hints, expressions of the face and gestures, who is honest, skilful, and of (noble) family.
</details>
