+++
title = "069 जाङ्गलं सस्यसम्पन्नम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In connection with the business of the foreign king, he should explore, by means of secret hints and transactions, the expression, the hints and the transactions among his servants, as also the intentions of the king himself.—(67)


Having learnt all the precise intentions of the foreign king, he shall take such steps that he may not bring trouble to himself.—(68)


He shall take up residence in a country which is open, fully supplied with grains, inhabited almost entirely by men of gentle birth, free from diseases, pleasant, where the vassals are obedient and where living is easily found.—(69)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verse 6.67)  
**

‘*He*’—the ambassador;—‘in connection with the business of the king’,
who is going to be marched against by his employer.—(67)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verse 7.67)**

‘*Niguḍheṅgitaceṣṭitaiḥ*’—‘By his own hidden gestures and actions’
(Govindarāja);—‘through the gestures and actions of the Confidential
agents of the other party’ (Kullūka); — ‘through men who hide their own
significant gestures and actions’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 188).

**(verse 7.68)**

The *Bhāṣya* on this verse has not been seen by us.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 188).

According to Medhātithi (mentioned by Buhler), the verse refers to the
*Ambassador* who should so act as not to bring evil upon his own party;
while according to others it refers to the *king*. Kullūka leaves it
doubtful.

**(verse 7.69)**

‘*Jāṅgalam*’—“The full definition of *Jāṅgala* is, according to a verse
quoted by Govindarāja, Rāghavānanda and Kullūka, as below—‘That country
is called *Jāṅgala* which has little water and grass, where strong
breezes prevail, the heat is great, where rain and the like are
abundant”—Buhler.

‘*Anāvilam*’—‘Where the people are not quarrelsome’ (Medhātithi,
mentioned by Buhler; though the Bhāṣya on this verse also is not found
in any of the printed editions, nor in any of the Mss. consulted by
us);—‘not subject to epidemic diseases’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 197), which quotes
the defintion of ‘*Jāṅgala*’ noted above, and adds that the
qualification that ‘water should be scarce’ is meant to indicate that
such a place would be less likely to be attacked by the enemy; in the
capital itself the supply of water should be abundant. It adds the
following explanatory notes on the text:—The place should be fully
supplied with ‘*shasya*’, *i*. *e*., with rich and fresh supplies of
grains from the autumn, winter, spring and rain harvests;—it should be
‘*āryaprāyam*’, *i.e*., full of virtuous people;—‘*anāvila*’, *i.e*.,
free from all dangers from serpents, tigers and the like,—‘*ramya*,’
agreeable, pleasant,—‘*ānatasāman* *ta*’, ‘having all subsidiary kings
fully won over by gifts of presents and honors’,—and ‘*svājīvya*’,
‘where means of agriculture and trade are easily procurable’;—in
‘*deśamāvaset*,’ the accusative ending is due to the root ‘*vas*’ being
preceded by the preposition ‘*ā*.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verse 7.69)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (3.4-5).—‘The king shall fix his abode in a district containing
open plains, fit for cattle and abounding in grain;—and inhabited by
many Vaiśyas and Śūdras.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.320).—‘He shall reside in a country which is open,
pleasant, fit for cattle, and where living is easily found.’

*Smṛtyantarā* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 197).—‘That country is called
*Jāṅgala* where there are a few trees and a little *water*, many birds
and many animals, and abundant heat and rain.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.54-56).—‘A country where living is cheap, soil fertile
and copiously irrigated, which is situated at the foot of a hill,
contains a large number of *Śūdras*, traders and artisans, where the
farmers are enterprising and energetic,

which is loyal to its ruler and inhospitable to its enemies, which
ungrudgingly bears taxation, extensive in area, crowded with foreigners,
which is rich, pious and abounding in cattle, where the popular leaders
are not foolish and voluptuous,—such a country is the best. The king
should always endeavour to promote the welfare of such a land; for with
its prosperity, the other constituents of the state also prosper.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.61).—‘A country having communications both by land and by
water, and furnished with castles affording shelter to the royal family
at the time of seige—such a country is suitable for the habitation of a
king seeking prosperity.’

*Śukraniti* (1.425-428).—‘In a place that abounds in trees, plants and
shrubs,—that is rich in cattle, birds and other animals,—that is
equipped with a good supply of water and grains and is happily provided
with resources in grass and fuel,—that is bestirred by the movements of
boats to the seas, and is not very far from the hills, and is on level
ground, a picturesque plain,—the king shall build his capital.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Do., p. 198).—‘The king having appointed his
assistants, shall take up his residence in a country which is supplied
with abundant fodder and fuel, pleasant, where the vassals are obedient,
and which is centrally situated; where the population consists largely
of Vaiśyas and Śūdras, nor liable to attack by enemies, containing a few
Brāhmaṇas and many labourers; which is not dependent totally upon rain,
inhabited by men devoted to the king, not over-taxed, and supplied with
plenty of fruits and flowers; nor accessible to the armies of others,
where happiness and unhappiness are equable; which is free from
reptiles, wild animals and thieves;—as far as possible, the king shall
take up his residence in such a country.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘The king, along with his assistants, shall
take up his residence in a country which is suitable for cattle, open,
pleasant, inhabited principally by Vaiśyas and Śūdras, free from
diseases.’

*Arthaśāstra* (8.109).—‘Either an old settlement or a new one he shall
get inhabited either by importing men from other countries or by
overflowings from his own country; the village shall be inhabited mostly
by Śūdras and cultivators; consisting of not less than a hundred and not
more than five hundred families, with boundaries extending over two or
four miles and well marked by trees, hills, etc.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

जाङ्ल्गलं नानाविधधान्यमूलफलपुष्पतृणेन्धनहेतुम् । **सस्यसंपन्नं** दुर्भिक्षरहितम् । **आर्यप्रायं** ब्राह्मणभूयिष्ठं धर्मादिपरिपालननिमित्तम् । **अनाविलं** श्वापदसरीसृपतस्करदंशमशकादिभिर् अनाकुलम् । **रम्यं** सर्वर्तुकुसुमसमृद्धपादपोद्यानादिभिः । **आनतसामन्तं** प्रह्वीभूतविनतसामन्तम् । **स्वाजीव्यं** प्रसन्नसलिलजलाशयम् अतिविशंकटगृहप्रासादमालिनम् । एभिश् च जाङ्गलादिभिर् अन्यैश् च देशगुणैः संपन्नं **देशम् आवसेत्** ॥ ७.६९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

069	Let him settle in a country which is open and has a dry climate, where grain is abundant, which is chiefly (inhabited) by Aryans, not subject to epidemic diseases (or similar troubles), and pleasant, where the vassals are obedient and his own (people easily) find their livelihood.
</details>
