+++
title = "070 धन्व-दुर्गम् मही-दुर्गम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall live in a city, taking up his residence either in a ‘bow-fort’, or in an ‘earthen fort’, or in an ‘aquatic fort,’ or in an ‘arborial fort,’ or in a ‘human fort,’ or in a ‘hilly fort.’—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१००]उक्तप्रकारेण द्विगुणोत्सेधेनैष्टकेन शैलेन द्वादशहस्ताद् ऊर्ध्वम् उद्धतेन तालमूलेन कपिशीर्षचिताग्रेण दृढप्रणाल्या परिकृतं[^१०१] **महीदुर्गम्** । अगाधेनाश्रयणीयेन चोदकेन परिवेष्टितम् **अब्दुर्गम्**[^१०२] । समन्ततो ऽर्धयोजनमात्रं घनमहावृक्षान्वितं **वार्क्षम्** । चतुरङ्गबलाधिष्ठितं प्रवरायुधवीरपुरुषप्रायं **नृदुर्गम्** । गिरिपृष्ठे दुरारोहम् एवैकमार्गानुगतम् अन्तर्नदीप्रस्रवणोदकं **गिरिदुर्गम्** ॥ ७.७० ॥


[^१०२]:
     M G J: durgam; I follow the suggestion of DK.


[^१०१]:
     DK (4: 1453) suggests: parivṛtam; M G J add: dhanurdurgam; clearly this is an error. It appears that the commentary on dhanurdurga is missing.


[^१००]:
     The commentary here is corrupt. See DK (4: 1453) for suggestions for improvement.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Bow-fort*’— surrounded by a strongly-built wall, built of bricks,
double-storeyed, more than 12 cubits high) with its base like the palm
and its top like the monkey’s head.

‘*Earthen fort*’— surrounded by earthen embankments.

‘*Aquatic fort*’—surrounded by unfathomable water.

‘*Arborial fort*’— surrounded, to a distance of four miles, with
densely-packed large trees.

‘*Human fort*’— garrisoned by an army of four divisions, and filled with
arms and heroic persons.

‘*Hilly fort*’— inaccessibly high, with a single pathway leading to it,
supplied with water from an underground stream.—(70)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 406), as describing
the various kinds of fortification;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1. 320) as
describing the six kinds of fortification;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti,
p. 202);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣana, p. 239), which adds the
following explanations:—‘*Dhanvadurgam*’ is ‘the fortification in the
midst of a desert’, called ‘*durga*’, because of its inaccessibility due
to absence of water and other difficulties;—it suggests another
explanation of the name—‘*dhanvā*’ is the name of a tract of land devoid
of shelter and water; and a fort that is surrounded by such a tract of
land is ‘*dhanvadurga*’; the meaning being that the king should make his
fort, and then render its vicinity waterless and shelterless. It notes a
third explanation of the name:—‘*Dhanvan*,’ ‘bow,’ indicates the
‘*dhanvin*’, ‘archer’; hence ‘*dhanvadurga*’ would mean a ‘line of
defence consisting of of men armed with bows and arrows This, it says,
is not right; as it involves the necessity of having recourse to
metaphorical explanation; and also because we have never heard of such a
‘fort’; again because such a ‘line of defence’ could be very easily
broken through; and lastly because this would be the same as the
‘*nṛdurga*’ coming later.—‘*Naradurga*’ is the line of defence
consisting of the army; and this consists of elephants, chariots, horses
and archers; and as this also would include archers, the separate name
‘*dhanvadurga*’ could not stand for the same sort of defence.—The
‘*Mahīdurga*’ is the ‘fort made of bricks and stones on the
ground’;—some people explain it as a fort consisting only of an unevenly
rugged tract of land;—the ‘Mahīdurga’ has been thus defined in *Auśanasa
Dhanurveda*—‘That fort is called *Mahīdurga* which consists of a tract
of land, portions of which are very high and others very low; it is
equipped with all accessories, well guarded and filled with all means of
offence and defence’. The ‘*Jaladurga*’ consists of that place which is
surrounded by swift, and unfordable streams of water.—The ‘*Vanadurga*’
is a tract of land surrounded by impenetrable forests and
trees.—‘*Baladurga* or *Nṛdurga*’ is that line of defence which consists
in the dispositions of the army.—The ‘*Giridurga*’ is erected either on
the summit of a mountain, or in a tract of land surrounded by hills.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 72a):—and in
*Nītimayūkha* (p. 64), which adds that Kāmandaka mentions the
*Airaṇadurga* also.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.86.5).—‘Dhanvadurga, Mahīdurga, Giridurga,
Manuṣyadurga, Mṛddurga, Vanadurga,—these are the six forts.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.6).—‘There shall he reside in a stronghold—either of desert,
or of armed men, or of fortifications, or of water, or of trees, or of
mountains.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘There he shall build forts for the protection of
men and treasures.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.57).—‘The king should settle in a fortress which is
extensive, environed by a wide ditch and secured with gates,
strengthened with high massive walls and sheltered by mighty mountains,
forests and deserts.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 199).—‘The wise king shall
build one of the six kinds of fort—the Bow fort, the Earthen fort, the
Human fort, the Arborial fort, the Aquatic fort and the Hilly fort.’

*Auśanasa Dhanurveda* (Do.).—‘(1) The *Bow fort* is that which is devoid
of water, abounding in pebbles, rough, without supports, beset with
obstacles and poisonous insects, not admitting of easy locomotion,
equipped with strong guards and free from disease. (2) The *Earthen
fort* is equipped with all accessories, well protected, and supplied
with implements, in places very high, and in places very low. (3) The
*Human fort* consists of men related to the king hereditarily, obedient
and contented, well-trained and under suitable officers, terrible, and
ever alert. (4) The *Arborial fort* consists of the forest, with paths
unknown, densely packed with trees, thickets and creepers and thorns
extending far and wide. (5) The *Aquatic fort* consists of water which
has only one entrance and that narrow, full of poison and such aquatic
animals as are fond of touching, devouring and killing. (6) *Hilly fort*
consists of a mountain, which is inaccessible, beyond the reach of
arrows, fully equipped with all accessories and comforts.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 199).—‘The king shall gather
for himself all the corn; what he cannot gather, that he shall burn; all
standing crops also he shall destroy; he shall demolish all passages in
rivers and over forts; he shall make all the water flow out; what cannot
flow out, that he shall pollute; he shall uproot all small trees near
about the fort; of the larger trees, he shall lop off all the branches.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘For the protection of his wife, wealth and people,
as also of stores, the king has to build a fort with double walls.’

*Matsya-purāṇa*. (Do., p. 203).—‘The fort shall be surrounded by a
ditch, equipped with walls and towers, as also with hundreds of guns and
other machines.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do., Lakṣaṇa, p. 242).—‘The king shall build one of
the six kinds of forts.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 119).—‘In the middle of the settlement, he shall
establish a natural fort for purposes of war either in the form of an
enclosed island, or high ground surrounded by deep ditches, called the
water fort; or of stone, in the shape of caves, called the *hilly fort*;
caves, or barren ground devoid of water and grass, called the *Bow
fort*; Or of thicket-covered marshy land, called the *Arborial fort*. Of
these the Water and Hill forts are for defence and the Bow and Arborial
forts are for safety during times of distress.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्राकारेण वेष्टितं विष्कम्भद्विगुणोत्सेधेनैष्टिकेन शैलेन वा द्वादशहस्त्[आद् ऊर्ध्वम् उ]च्छ्रितेन तालमूलेन कपिशीर्षचिताग्रेण । । । दृढवप्रेण परिष्कृतं **महीदुर्गम्** । अगाधेनानास्रावणीयेन चोदकेन परिवेष्टितम् **अब्दुर्गम्** । समन्ततो ऽर्धयोजनमात्रं घनमहावृक्षचितं **वार्क्षदुर्गम्** । चतुरङ्गबलाधिष्ठितं प्रवरायुधीयपुरुषप्रायं **नृदुर्गम्** । गिरिपृष्टं दुरारोहम् एकमार्गानुगतम् [अन्तर्]नदीप्रस्रवणोदमं **गिरिदुर्गम्** ॥ ७.७० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

070	Let him build (there) a town, making for his safety a fortress, protected by a desert, or a fortress built of (stone and) earth, or one protected by water or trees, or one (formed by an encampment of armed) men or a hill-fort.
</details>
