+++
title = "085 समम् अब्राह्मणे"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The gift to a non-Brāhmaṇa is equable; that to a nominal Brāhmaṇa is twofold; that to the Teacher, a hundred-thousand-fold and that to a person thoroughly learned in the Veda, endless.—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विप्रेभ्य इति च प्रकृतम् । 

- <u>तथा च</u> प्राग् अप्य् उक्तम्- "वेदतत्त्वार्थविदुषे ब्राह्मणाय" (म्ध् ३.८६) इति । न च यथाश्रुतदानफलोपपत्तिः । कीदृशं हि तत्साम्यम्- जातितः परिमाणतः उपकारतो वा । यदि तावज् जातितस् तद् इति, औषधपानोद्देशेन देवलेभ्यो दत्तं खाद्यदानं दुःखायैव स्यात् । तिक्तकटुकषायाणि प्रायश औषधानि विरेचनीयानि,[^११२] न प्रीतिजननानि । अथ पर्माणतः, तत्रापि यदि द्रव्यम् अनपेक्ष्य केवलपरिमाणसाम्यम्, सुवर्णं दत्तं तत्परिमाणं ताम्रं लभ्येत, अन्यद् वा मृत्काष्ठादि । अथ जातितः परिमाणतश् च, तत्र प्राग् उक्ता एव दोषाः । अथोपकारतः, तत्रापि हि यदि तज्जातीय एवोपकारः व्याधिनिवृत्तिर् औषधोपकारः । असति च व्याधौ फलस्य विनिवृत्तिः, अतो व्याधिनिवृत्तिफलकेनौषधदानेन व्याधिर् आक्षेप्तव्यः । सुसमं वा अन्यदुःखम् इति प्राप्तम् । तस्माद् यथा "निवीतं मनुष्याणाम् उपवीतं देवानाम् उपव्ययते देवलक्ष्मम् एव तत् कुरुते" (त्स् २.५.११.१) इत्य् उपव्यानविशेषान् निवीतादयो न पृथग् वाक्यानि, तथेदम् अपि द्रष्टव्यम् ।


[^११२]:
     M G add: ca

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । नात्राख्यातश्रवणम्[^११३] अस्ति, सर्वेषां समत्वात् । तत्र यद्य् अर्थवादः, **सहस्रं वेदपारगे** इति तद् अर्थवादो ऽस्तु । अथायं विधिः, विध्यन्तरशेषभावात् सर्वत्र विधिर् अभ्युपेतव्यः, विशेषाभावात् । निवीतादिषु तु "उपव्यथते" इत्य् अत्राख्यातदर्शनात् तदर्थस्य विधिविषयत्वयोग्यत्वाभावाद् एकत्वावगमाच् च युक्तार्थवद् एव, तर्ह्य् अनुक्तो विशेषः । यत् तु "नाब्राह्मणेभ्यो दानम् अस्ति" इति, तद् विस्मृतं भवेत्, दीनानाथादिभ्यः सर्ववर्णेभ्यो दानस्य विहितत्वात् । एतान्य् एव च विधायकानि वाक्यानि ब्राह्मणेभ्यो राज्ञां दानस्य ।


[^११३]:
     M G: -śravaṇasyapy

- <u>यत् तूक्तं</u> "यथाश्रुतफलानुपपत्तिः, सर्वप्रकारेणास्याभ्युपगम्यमानत्वात्" इति,

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । लौकिकीयं वाचोयुक्तिः **समम्** इति । यल् लोके नात्युत्कृष्टं तद् एवम् उच्यते, "समलवणाः सक्तवः" इति । उपकारापेक्षा च **द्विगुणम्** इति संख्याश्रुतिः, यावत् तस्योपकारस् तावद् द्विगुणो भवति । न तद्द्रव्यप्राप्तिर् नापि तज्जातीय एवोपकारः, किं तु प्रीत्यतिशयोत्पत्तिः । न चेह फलविशेषश्रुतिर् येनेयम् आशङ्कापि स्यात् "किं तद् एव द्रव्यं प्राप्येत उत स एवोपकारः" इति । अश्रुतफलविशेषेषु स्वर्गः फलम् । किं च, तिलादिदाने प्रजाप्तिः फलं श्रूयते । तत्र का द्रव्यसाम्याशङ्का । तस्माच् चायम् अप्य् अर्थ उत्तरोत्तरो ऽत्र च पात्रातिशयदानात् फलातिशयसिद्धिः । तथा चाह "पात्रस्य हि विशेषेण" (म्ध् ७.८६) इति ।

- **ब्राह्मणब्रुवे** । ब्रुवशब्दः कुत्सायाम् । जातिमात्रब्राह्मणो ऽध्ययनादिगुणहीन इत्य् अर्थः । **आचार्य** उपनेता । **वेदपारगः** अध्ययनश्रवणाभ्यां वेदस्यान्तं गतः ॥ ७.८५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Objection*:—“As a matter of fact, it has been laid down in the present
context that gifts should be made to *Brāhmaṇas* (82); and before this
also (under 3.96) it has been declared that gifts should be made ‘to a
Brāhmaṇa who knows the real meaning of the Veda.’ Then again, it cannot
be reasonable to accept the words of the text in the literal sense—that
the various kinds of gifts actually bring about the rewards in the
manner stated. For instance, of what sort is the *equableness* (between
the *gift* and the reward accruing thence, to the giver)? Is it in (*a*)
kind, or (*b*) quantity, or (*c*) utility? If it be held to be in
*kind*, then, in a case where, on the occasion of drinking a medicinal
drug, the patient makes a gift of those drags (?) to temple-worshippers,
the gift would be conducive to pain. Because medicinal drugs as a rule
are bitter, hot and pungent and tend to move the bowels. If, again the
‘equableness’ meant were in regard to *quantity*,—and there also the
equality were only in *quantity*, irrespective of the character of the
*substance*,—then a gift of *gold* might bring, as its reward, an equal
quantity of *copper*, or some such things as a clod of earth or a piece
of wood and the like. If again, the ‘equableness’ meant were both in
regard to *kind* and *quantity*, then also there would be the same
difficulties as those just pointed out. If lastly, the ‘equableness’
meant were in regard to *utility*,—then also, if the use also were of
the same kind, in that case, the use of the medicinal drugs consisting
in the curing a certain disease,—if the reward were to be of the same
kind, then it would be as good as nonexistent, if the man did not happen
to suffer from the same disease; so that the gift of those drugs would
have to make the giver subject to that disease again, or some other
disease of the same degree of seriousness. For these reasons, the
declarations contained in the present verse should not be regarded as
distinct sentences standing by themselves. Just as in the case of the
Vedic declarations—‘The *Nivīta* form is for human beings end the
*Upavīta* for divine beings; so that when the man adopts the *Upavīta*
form, he takes upon himself a mark of the gods’,—what is said in regard
to the *Nivīta* and the rest is not taken as distinct from what is said
regarding the adopting of the *Upavīta* form.”

The answer to the above is as follows:—In the present text we do not.
find any verb in any of the sentences, every one of which, therefore,
stands on the same footing. If it is a commendatory description, then
this can apply only to the statement ‘that to the man learned in the
Veda, endless.’ If again, it is an Injunction, then all the sentences
should be regarded as equally injunctive; there is nothing to indicate
that any one of them is subservient to any other. In the case of the
passage regarding the ‘*Nivīta*’ &c; on the other hand, we find a verb
in the term ‘*upavyayate*’ (‘adopts the *upavīta* form’); so that the
sentence containing it fulfilling the conditions of an Injunctive
sentence, it is only right that the others should be taken as
subservient to it.

As for the argument that no gifts to a Non-Brāhmaṇa can be
possible,—this must be due to the objector having forgotten that gifts
to the poor and helpless of all castes have been enjoined. In fact it is
only in regard to gifts to be made by Kings to *Brāhmaṇas* that we have
the sentences in the present verse.

As regards the argument that “there is no possibility of rewards
accruing in the manner stated in the text, on account of all the various
methods indicated bring, open to objection,”—our answer is as
follows;—The mode of expression adopted here is that of ordinary
parlance. In ordinary parlance, what is not *very* *good* is called
‘equable’; *e*. *g*. in such expressions as ‘the Saktu contains an
equable supply of salt.’ As for the reward being ‘*two-fold?*, the
two-foldness meant is in regard to *utility*; the meaning bring that the
reward is doubly as useful as the original gift. It is not meant either
that the same *kind* of substance is obtained in return, or that the
*utility* is of the same kind; all that is meant is that the degree of
*happiness* produced is twice as much. Further, as a matter of fact, the
verse is not meant to be an ‘injunction of rewards’; so that there is no
room for the raising of any such questions as to whether it is the
*same* *substance*, or another substance, that is obtained in reward.
Specially as in cases where no rewards ore mentioned, the attainment of
Heaven is always regarded as the reward. Then again, in connection with
the giving of sesamum, the obtaining of children has been declared to be
the reward; and certainly in such a case there can be no possibility of
the reward being of the same *kind* as the gift. Thus all that is meant
here, and also in the subsequent passages, is that the excellence of the
recipient adds to the excellence of the gift. This is exactly what is
emphasised in the next verse.

In the term ‘*brāhmaṇa—bruva*’ (‘nominal Brāhmaṇa’)—the particle
‘*bruva*’ has a derogatory sense; it staṇḍs for one who is Brāhmaṇa by
caste only, and is wholly devoid of learning and other qualities.

‘*Teacher*’—the Initiator.

‘*A person thoroughly learned in the Veda*,’—one who has, by learning
and study, got to the end of the Veda.—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Samam*’—‘Middling’ (Medhātithi);—‘neither more nor less than what is
described in the scriptures’ (Kullūka and Govindarāja);—‘equal to the
kindness shown’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 286).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 7.85-86)  
**

*Gautama* (5.20).—‘The reward of a gift to a non-Brāhmaṇa is equal to
the value of the gift; that of what is given to a Brāhmaṇa is twofold;
that of what is given to a Vedic scholar, thousandfold; and that of what
is given to one thoroughly versed in the Veda, endless.’

*Viṣṇu* (93.1-4).—‘What is given to a non-Brāhmaṇa produces the same
fruit in the world to come;—what is given to one who calls himself a
Brāhmaṇa produces twice the same fruit;—what is given to one who has
studied the main portions of the Veda produces a thousand times the same
fruits;—what is given to one who has mastered the whole Veda, produces
infinite fruit.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.201).—‘Cows, land, gold and other things are to be
offered, with respect, to proper recipients; a man desiring his own
welfare shall give nothing to an improper person.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 286).—‘The cow, the horse, the gold and the
land, on seeing the hands of a Brāhmaṇa ignorant of the Veda, decries
the giver.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इतश् चैतेभ्यो देयम् । गुणवत्स्नातकब्राह्मणनियमदानस्तुतिप्रकरणाद् **अब्राह्मणा**दिग्रहणम् इदं विद्वद्दानप्रशंसार्थं वेदितव्यम् । कथं कृत्वा । अब्राह्मणब्राह्मणब्रुवोर् नोपपद्यते । उक्तं च-



> वेदविद्याव्रतस्नाताञ् श्रोत्रियान् गृहम् आगतान् ।  
> पूजयेद् धव्यकव्याभ्यां विपरीतांस् तु वर्जयेत् ॥ इति । (म्ध् ८.६३)

न चायं फलविधिः, फलविधौ हि काम्यदानस्य स्याद् । एवं च यथोक्तार्थसामर्थ्यान् नायं फलविधिः कल्पोपदेशार्थः श्लोकः । अन्यथा हि प्रकरणम् उपरुध्येतेति । अथ वा यथोक्ते दीनानातनिमित्ते अब्राह्मणादिदाने पात्रविशेषात् फलविशेषप्रदर्शनार्थः स्याद् अयं राज्ञां विशेषधर्मः । यत्कारणं न ह्य् अकस्मात् प्रशंसा स्याद् इति ॥ ७.८५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

085	A gift to one who is not a Brahmana (yields) the ordinary (reward; a gift) to one who calls himself a Brahmana, a double (reward); a gift to a well-read Brahmana, a hundred-thousandfold (reward); (a gift) to one who knows the Veda and the Angas (Vedaparaga, a reward) without end.
</details>
