+++
title = "089 आहवेषु मिथो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Kings, seeking to slay each other in battle and fighting with gheat energy, without turning back, proceed to heaven.—(89)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आहूयन्ते युद्धार्थम् इतरे यत्र वीराः स **आहवः** संग्रामः । **मिथः** स्पर्धमानाः । **अन्योन्यं** परस्परं **जिघांसन्तो** हननेच्छवः । **युद्ध्यमानाः** प्रहरन्तः । **परं शक्त्या** परया[^१२०] शक्त्या, यथाबलम् इत्य् अर्थः । छान्दसत्वात् "परया"[^१२१] इत्य् अस्य स्थाने "परम्" इति रूपम् । **अपराङ्मुखाः** युद्ध्यमानाः इति संबन्धः । **स्वर्गं यान्ति** ।


[^१२१]:
     M G J: parety (I follow DK 4: 2777)


[^१२०]:
     M G 1st ed. add: yathā

- <u>ननु</u> च राज्यलोभात् प्रवृत्तानां दृष्टस्य फलस्य संभवात् कुतः स्वर्गः । 

- <u>उच्यते</u>[^१२२] । "न कूटैर् आयुधैः" (म्ध् ७.९०) इत्यादिना वक्ष्यमाणयुद्धनियमापेक्षः स्वर्गः । न हि तेषां नियमानाम् अन्यत् प्रयोजनम् अस्ति । अथ वा निश्चिते पराजये निराशस्य यद् युद्धावतरणम्, तच् च स्वर्गायैव, त्यक्तराज्यस्यापि शक्तप्रणिपातेन तदनुजीवनसंभवात् । तस्माद् अर्हस् तत्फलसंभवः । अस्माद् एव वचनान् नात्मत्यागनिषेधस्य विषयो ऽयम् । [^१२३]


[^१२२]:
     M G J: svarga ucyate, taking the latter as part of that sentence. Generally, however, Medhātithi begins his answer to an objection with ucyate (so also DK 4: 2777).

- **महीक्षितः** मण्डलेश्वराः, न पुनस् तदनुजीविनः । तेषां हि स्वाम्यर्थैव प्रवृत्तिः, न स्वार्था । अतश् च कुतस् तेषां फलसंभवः, ऋत्विजाम् इव दक्षिणापणेन परिक्रीतानाम् । एवम् एषाम् अपि भृतिपरिक्रीतानां कुतः स्वर्गादिफलोत्पत्तिः ।

- <u>ननु</u> च अविशेषेणैतद् उक्तम्- 

- उद्यतैर् आहवे शस्त्रैः क्षत्रधर्महतस्य च । 

- सद्यः संतिष्ठते यज्ञः ॥ इति । (म्ध् ५.९७ )

तथा-

- द्वाव् इमौ पुरुषौ लोके सूर्यमण्डलभेदिनौ । 

- परिव्राड् योगयुक्तश् च शूरश् चाभिमुखो हतः ॥ इति । (प्स्म् ३.३०)

तथा भारते युद्धप्रेक्षिणाम् अपि स्वर्गः संदर्शितः । मन्त्रलिङ्गानि च सन्ति-

- ये युध्यन्ते प्रधनेषु शूरसो ये तनुत्यजः ।

- ये वा सहस्रदक्षिणास् तांश् चिद् एवापि[^१२४] गच्छतात् ॥


[^१२४]:
     M G J: tāṃś ca devāpi (I follow DK 4: 2777)

सहस्रदक्षिणानां यजमानानां शूराणां च रणशिरसि त्यक्तप्राणानां महाफलत्वं दर्शयन्ति-[^१२५] "ये युध्यन्ते" । न च मरणायैव क्रियन्ते[^१२६] । न हि संपरिग्रहकाले ऽयम् उपसंवादो ऽस्ति यथा होत्रोद्गात्रादीनां स्वप्रवचनसमाख्यानियतार्त्विज्यपदार्थानुष्ठानायैव वरणम् । तस्मात् प्रभुकार्योद्देशेन यन् मरणं तद् अनुक्रान्तफलायैव । न च परप्रयुक्तात् कर्मणो ऽन्यस्य फलं नास्ति । अश्वमेधावभृथे हि ब्रह्मघ्नस्य स्नानाद् अयजमानस्यैव शुद्धिः ।


[^१२६]:
     M G: mriyante


[^१२५]:
     M G: darśayati

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> ।  प्रजार्थे युद्धे प्राणत्यागो धर्मायैव[^१२७] । यद् उक्तम् "उद्यतैर् आहवे" (म्ध् ५.९७) इति, तदा भृतिपरिक्रीतस्यास्वतन्त्रस्य,[^१२८] यस्य वा "कुरु[^१२९] प्रयाणं रणे" इत्य् एव परिकरो बद्धस् तदपेक्षं एतत् यज्ञसंस्थावचनम् । एवंभूतश् च "अभिमुखो हतः" (प्स्म् ३.३०) इति । 


[^१२९]:
     M G J: kurviti (I follow DK 4: 2777)


[^१२८]:
     M G: -āsvatasya


[^१२७]:
     M G places this sentence after bhṛtiparikrītasyāsvatantrasya.

- अथ वा नरकाभाव एव "सूर्यमण्डलभेदनम्" युद्ध्यमानस्य भविष्यति । यत्र विषयान्तरेश्वरेण राज्ञा परस्य राज्ञो विषयो हन्यते भज्यते जनो लुप्येत् तत्र तदर्थं युद्धे प्राणत्यागो धर्मार्थः । अन्धतमो हि नरके तदभावात् सति प्राकाश्ये सूर्यमण्डलभेदनवचनम् । सूर्यमण्डलं भिनत्ति, उपरिष्टाल् लोकान् आप्नोति, नाधःप्रपततीत्य् अर्थः । भृतिपरिक्रीतस्य प्रभोः संग्रामे समुपस्थिते, तम् एव जहतो नरकनिपतनम्, तदर्थं युध्यमानस्य भर्तृपिण्डानृण्यं गतवतो दुष्कृतेनाप्रतिबध्यमानस्य स्वैः सुकृतैर् युक्त एव स्वर्गादिलाभः । अत उक्तम् "सद्यः संतिष्ठते यज्ञः" (म्ध् ५.९७) इति । अव्यवधानेन यज्ञफलम् अविशेषश्रुतौ स्वर्गम् अवाप्नोतीत्य् अर्थः । एवं भारते ऽपि भृतिपरिक्रीतानां स्वर्गफलावाप्तिवचनम् उपपद्यते । युद्धप्रेक्षिणां तु स्वर्गावाप्तिर् अर्थवाद एव । अथ वा बहुषु जीवनोपायेषु सत्सु यच् छस्त्रेण जीवनं ततो नियमात् स्वर्गः । 

- यत् तु न मरणाय क्रीयन्त इति, शस्त्रभृतां भृतिदाने नान्यद् युद्धात् प्रयोजनम् अस्ति, विशेषानुपदेशात् — सर्वकार्योद्यताः सर्वप्रकारं मदर्थः संपादनीय इति परिक्रीयन्ते — तत्र यदा युद्धम् उपस्थितं भवति, तदा आ शरीरपातात् प्रभोर् अर्थः कर्तव्यः, तथानृण्यं भवति । अनुपस्थिते तु युद्धे यदि भृत्यस्य मरणं भवति, तदा सर्वे ऽनृणा एव । उद्युक्ते ह्य् असौ तत्कार्ये तादृश एवास्योपसंवादः । युद्धकाले योद्धव्यं भवतीति लिङ्गदर्शनम् अपि तूपपद्यत एव । 

- अश्वमेधावभृते तु स्पष्टं वचनं "तस्मात् समागमे तेषाम्" (म्ध् ११.८२) इति । इह तु युद्धसाध्यम् इति विशेषः ॥ ७.८९ ॥

_तान् इदानीम् अदृष्टार्थान् नियमान् दर्शयति ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Āhava*’ is that where heroes are *challenged* by one another to fight,
*i.e*., the battle; vying with one another and ‘*seeking to slay each
other*’;—‘*fighting*’— striking —‘*with great energy*’—to the utmost of
their power. It is on account of metrical exigencies that in place of
‘*parayā*’ (as qualifying ‘*śaktyā*’) we have the form ‘*param*’.

‘*Without turning back*’;—this is to be construed with
‘*fighting*’;—*proceed to heaven*.’

*Objection*—“As a matter of fact, the action taken by kings is
instigated by a love for territorial expansion; so that an ordinary
physical reward being possible, why should Heaven be mentioned as the
reward?”

Heaven is mentioned as the reward in connection with the observance of
the rules of war going to be described; for the observance of these
rules there can be no other motive. Even the king who has renounced his
kingdom may observe the rules laid down in the next and following
verses, and by surrendering to the powerful enemy he would become
entitled to the trancendental reward (Heaven; there being no possibility
of his winning any territories). Or again, when a king, on suffering
defeat in battle, enters the fray (in sheer desperation), this act can
only lead to Heaven. And on the strength of the present verse, such
desperate fighting could not fall within the purview of the prohibition
of self-immolation.

‘*Kings*’—Rulers of provinces; not those under them; as the action of
these latter is prompted by the interest of their masters and not by any
interest of their own; under the circumstances, how could there be any
rewards for them? In fact, their case is analogous to that of the
Priests whose services have been secured by means of a stipulation
regarding fees; so that in the case of the king’s underlings also, in as
much as their service has been secured by means of wages, how could
there be any reward in the shape of Heaven or the like?

“But under 5-97, it has been declared without any reservation that the
sacrifice is immediately accomplished for the *Kṣatriya* who is killed
by means of uplifted weapons, in due accordance with the duties of the
Kṣatriya; and again—‘those two persons pierce through the solar orb—the
Renunciate is meditation and the hero killed in the forefront of
battle’;—further, in the Mahābhārata, it has been declared that Heaven
is attained even by those who witness the battle. There are Vedic texts
indicative of the same fact; *e.g*., ‘Those brave men who fight in
battles and give up their bodies there, as also those who pay a thousand
as the sacrificial fee, go to the Gods,’—which shows that great rewards
accrue to those sacrificers who pay a thousand as sacrificial fees,—‘as
also those brave persons who give up their lives in battle’. Further,
the text speaks of ‘those who fight,’ and not ‘those who have sold
themselves for dying (for others);’ specially as there is no such
stipulation made at the time that the man’s services are engaged. In the
case of the officiating priests, the *Hotṛ*, the *Udgātṛ* and the rest,
their appointment is for the express purpose of performing those
priestly duties that are indicated by their titles. From all this it
follows that even in the case of a map dying in serving his master,
there is transcendental reward. Nor is there any such hard and fast rale
as that there can be no reward in the case of an act prompted by the
purposes of another man. In fact the slayer of a Brāhmaṇa becomes
purified by bathing at the Final Bath of the *Aśvamedha* sacrifice,
where he is not the performer of the sacrifice.”

The answer to the above is as follows:—As a matter of fact, the giving
up of his life by the king for the benefit of his people is actually
conducive to merit. As regards what has been said regarding the losing
of one’s life in battle being tantamount to the accomplishment of a
sacrifice,—this must refer to the man whose services have been engaged
on a salary and who, not being his own master, enters the battle simply
on the word of command to ‘march forward’. This is the person meant by
the expression ‘who is killed in the fore-front of battle.’

Or, the ‘piercing of the solar orb’ by the man fighting in battle would
mean only *being saved from hell*. In a case where a king’s realm is
attacked and pillaged by another king, and his people are being
massacred, if the former undertakes to fight against him and loses his
life in the fray, this would be conducive to merit. If he does not
fight, he falls into ‘blind darkness’, which means *Hell*, on account of
the total absence of light there. What the ‘piercing of the solar orb’
means is that the man reaches the regions beyond the solar regions;
*i.e*., he does not fall downwards. When a man has accepted service on
pay, under a master, if he fails tonight for his master in battle, and
abandons him, his fall into hell is certain. On the other hand, if the
man has fought his master’s battle and has become free from the debt of
the wages he has received from him,—if he is not bowed down by his
sins,—it is only natural that he should attain heaven, by virtue of his
own meritorious acts. It is in view of this that it has been declared
that ‘his sacrifice becomes immediately accomplished’. Thus also the
passage in the Mahābhārata becomes reconciled, where it is said that
persons who have accepted service in the army attain heaven. As for the
mention of Heaven being attained by persons ‘witnessing the battle’,
this must be regarded as a commendatory exaggeration.

Or, the meaning of all this may be that, there being many means of
livelihood, living by military service is sure to lead to heaven.

As regards the argument that it is not for dying that the men are
engaged in military service,—in reality when soldiers are paid their
wages, it is for no other purpose than for fighting; specially as no
other purpose has been mentioned. The men are engaged by the master with
the view that ‘they shall be ready for all kinds of work and shall help
me in all my undertakings.’ So that when a war breaks out, it becomes
their duty to do everything for their master, even up to the giving up
of the body; and thus alone is he able to repay his master. When,
however, there is no war, if the servant happens to die, then he dies a
servant (and not one freed from bondage); as the repayment of his debt
is accomplished only if he accomplishes some purpose of his master,
similar to that for which he has been engaged. as for the texts quoted
as indicating the attainment of heaven by men dying in battle,—these
also become reconciled in the above manner.

What has been mid regarding the murderer becoming freed from sins by
bathing at the Final Bath of the *Aśvamedha* is accepted on the strength
of the direct assertion to that effect, contained in such texts
as—‘Hence on their association etc. etc.’; while in the present instance
going upward is stated to be the result of fighting;—and this
constitutes a difference between the two cases (which, thus, cannot be
regarded as analogous).—(89)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 405), which
explains ‘*mithaḥ*’ as ‘vying with each other’;—and in
*Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 28a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba* (2.26, 2, 3).—‘They say that a king who is slain in
attempting to recover the property of Brāhmaṇas performs a sacrifice
where his body takes the place of the sacrificial post and at which an
unlimited fee is given.—Hereby have been declared the rewards of other
heroes who fall fighting for a worthy cause.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.45).—‘Those who have been killed in protecting a cow, or a
Brāhmaṇa, or a king, or a friend, or their own property, or their own
wedded wife, or their own life, go to heaven.’

*Yājñavalkya*, (1.323).—(See under 87.)

*Yājñavalkya* (1.324).—‘Even when one’s own army is broken up, if one
does not turn back, each step that he takes is equal to a
Horse-Sacrifice.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 405).—‘For the sake of his people,
the king shall fight, and even give up his life; thereby he obtains the
reward of a Horse-Sacrifice. If a man, without turning back, is killed
in battle by his enemies, he obtains the regions of Indra, won by his
valour.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 406).—‘The Kṣatriya resides on the chest of the
Kṣatriya, and the Brāhmaṇa at his back; therefore he should always guard
his back in battle; or else he becomes a Brāhmaṇa-killer.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अतश् च संग्रामाद् अनिवर्तित्वं राज्ञां विशेषधर्मः । तस्य च युध्यतो नियमः शिष्यते च ॥ ७.८९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

089	Those kings who, seeking to slay each other in battle, fight with the utmost exertion and do not turn back, go to heaven.
</details>
