+++
title = "155 मध्यमस्य प्रचारम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—on the conduct of the ‘intermediary’ oh the doings of the king bent upon conquest, on the action of the neutral king, as also that of his enemy, with special care.—(155)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एतस्मिन् राजमण्डल इमाश् चतस्रो राजप्रकृतयो मुख्या भवन्ति- विजिगीषुर् अरिर् मध्यम उदासीन इति । तत्र च यो[^२०३] राजा प्रकृतिसंपन्नः "अहम् एवंविधां पृथिवीं विजेष्ये"[^२०४] अभ्युत्थितः स **विजिगीषुः** उत्साहशक्तियोगात् । **शत्रुस्** त्रिविधः- सहजः प्राकृतः कृत्त्रिमः । स्वभूम्यन्तर इति **मध्यमः**, अनयोर् अरिविजिगीष्वोर् असंहतयोर् निग्रहसमर्थः, न संहतयोः[^२०५] । **उदासीनः**, अरिविजिगीषुमध्यमानाम् असंहतानां निग्रहसमर्थः, न तु संहतानाम् ॥ ७.१५५ ॥


[^२०५]:
     M G: nigrahasamarthanasaṃhatayor


[^२०४]:
     DK (4: 1853) suggests adding: iti


[^२०३]:
     M G: tayo
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Of the said ‘circle’ the following are the four principal components—(1)
the King bent upon conquest, (2) the Enemy, (3) the Intermediary and (4)
the Neutral. Of these the King, who has people on his side and who has
made up his mind to conquer a certain part of the world, is called ‘bent
upon conquest,’ by reason of his being endowed with courage and
strength.—the ‘Enemy’ is of three kinds—(*a*) born, (*b*) natural and
(*c*) acquired.—The ‘Intermediary’ is the king whose territory is
co-terminous with that of the king in question.—The ‘Neutral’ is one who
is capable of defeating each of the two—‘one who is bent upon conquest’
and his ‘enemy’—singly, but not con jointly; and also each of the
three—‘he who is bent upon conquest,’ the ‘enemy’ and the
‘intermediary’—singly, but not conjointly.—(I55)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. Kāmandakīya Nītisāra, 8.14, 18.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 320), which adds
the following notes:—In the ‘circle’ of kings, there are four kinds of
kings—(1) The king seeking conquest (2) the three kinds of enemy—the
natural enemy, the artificial enemy and the neighbouring state, (3) the
middle state, which is capable of defeating either of the two parties to
a conflict, taken singly (4) the neutral, who is capable of smashing any
one of the above three.

This verse is quoted in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 36a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 7.155-159)  
**

*Śukranīti* (1.121). The kingdom is an organism of seven limbs—the King,
the Minister, the Ally, the Treasure, the Kingdom, the Fort and the
Army.’

Do. (2.141-113).—‘The Priest, the Viceroy, the Premier, the Commander,
the Councillor, the Judge, the Scholar, the Finance Minister and the
ordinary Minister and the Spy, these are the ten limbs of the King.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.38).—‘Towards his neighbour and natural enemy, his ally, a
neutral power, and a power situated in between his natural enemy and an
oppressive power,—let him adopt alternately, as the occasion and the
time require, the four modes of obtaining success—Conciliation,
Division, Presents and Force.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.344).—‘The enemy, the ally, the neutral power, and
those coming in between these,—all these he shall deal with through
conciliation and other methods. These methods are Conciliation,
Presents, Division and Force.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara*—(Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 319).—‘The king shall he
careful with regard to the seven-limbed kingdom; the *seven limbs* being
Conciliation, Presents, Fortification, Treasury, Fines, Ally and
People.’—He shall banish all persons obstructing these seven, and he
shall (quickly destroy all his enemies.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do., p. 322).—‘The king himself seeking glory, has to
d«al with the following—Enemy, Ally, Enemy’s Ally, Ally’s ally, Ally of
the enemy’s ally;—these in front; then come the following in the
rear—one attacking in the rear, one restraining this rear-attack, those
helping the rear-attack, and those helping the restrainer.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Part II, p. 224).—‘Master, Minister, People, Fort,
Treasury, Force and Allies are the seven Constituent Factors.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 175).—‘The Methods are Conciliation, Presents,
Division and Force. *Conciliation* is five-fold—describing virtues,
recalling mutual relationship, recalling mutual help, indicating future
possibilities, self-surrender.—*Describing of virtues* consists in
setting forth the nobility of birth, physical virtues, facts and so
forth.—*Recalling of relationship* consists in pointing out the blood
and other relationships;—*Recalling of Mutual Help* in reminding one of
the occasions on which help was rendered;—*Indicating of Future
Possibilities*, in pointing out that the acceptance of the proposal
would bring benefits;—*Self-surrender*, in ottering all one’s
resources—“whatever is mine is yours, you can make such use of it as you
like.”

*Śukranīti* (4.1.51, *et. seq*.)—‘Alliance, Presents, Division and
Force,—these policies are to be applied separately to the Friend,
Relatives, Family, Subjects and Enemies. “No one is such a friend as
yourself”—this is called *Alliance*.—“ All my goods, even my life, are
yours”—this is *Present*.—The narrative of one’s own merits or those of
other friends to somebody is *Division.-*—“If you do such and such an
act, I shall cease to be your friend”—this is *Force*............ The
statesmanlike King shall employ these policies in such a wav that
friends, neutrals and foes can never go beyond himself.—*Sāma*, Peace,
is to be employed first,—then Presents,—then the playing off of enemies
against one another. Force is to be employed only when actual danger
threatens. Alliance and Presents are to be employed towards forceful
enemies; Alliance and Division towards those superior in strength;
Division and Force towards equals and pure Force is advisable only
against an enemy who is powerless.—Towards friends, only Alliance and
Presents are to be employed;—never Division or Force.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.16).—‘King, Minister, Kingdom, Caste, Treasury, Army and
Allies are known to form the seven constituents of government; good
sense and unebbing energy are its primary stay.’

Do. (4.1-2).—‘The King, Minister, Kingdom, Fort, Treasury, Army and
Allies form the seven constituents of the state. They contribute to
one-another’s weal, and the loss of even a single one of these renders
the whole imperfect; he who wishes to keep the state perfect should
study their nature.’

Do. (8.4, 5).—‘Minister, Fort, Kingdom, Treasury and Army,—have been
declared to be the five constituents of the central sovereign.—These
five and the allied sovereigns, and in the seventh place, the central
monarch himself, have been said by Bṛhaspati to compose what is known as
the “seven-limbed state.”

*Kāmandaka* (8.16).—‘*Ari*, *Mitra*, *Arimitra*, *Mitrāmitra*, and the
*Arimitrāmitra* are the five sovereigns whose domains he consecutively
in front of the king going out on a conquering expedition.’

Do. (8.18).—‘The sovereign whose domain lies intervening between the
dominions of the *Ari* and the conquering king is denominated the
*Madhyama*. His attitude becomes friendly when the *Ari* and the
conquering king are united, and it is hostile to them when these are
disunited.’

Do. (8.25).—‘The twelve cardinal sovereigns, together with their
respective five *Prakṛtis*, constitute the *Prakṛtimaṇḍala* consisting
of seventy-two factors.’

Do. (8.36).—‘The six Prakṛtis, *viz*., Minister, Kingdom, Fort,
Treasury, Army and Ally,—of each of the ten sovereigns taken together,
compose what is designated the *maṇḍala of sixty factors*.’

Do. (8.70).—‘The king should please his own *Prakṛtis* by conciliation,
presents and bestowal of honour, and be should crush the *Prakṛtis* of
his enemies by sowing dissension among them and by openly attacking
them.’

Do. (14.1).—‘The *Prakṛtis*, from Minister to Ally, are the constituents
of the state. Of all the weaknesses of the state, the gravest is the
weakness of the king himself.’

Do. (15.22).—‘Internal disaffection should he allayed by such measures
of policy as conciliation, presents and the rest; and external
disaffection by the causing of dissension and disunion among the
disaffected party. A wise King should allay disaffection in such a
manner that the disaffected do not go over to the enemy.—The loss of men
and munition is said to be *destruction* and the loss of money and food
is said to be *drain*; the wise and prudent king should never have
recourse to a policy leading to such destruction and drain.’

Do. (15.55).—‘The king should wean over to his side, by means of
conciliation, presents and the rest, the foresters, frontier tribes, and
commanders of forts, whom he may come across *en route*. In difficult
and intricate tracts these people become the guide and point out the
way.’

*Kāmandaka* (17.3).—‘Conciliation, presents, display of military power
and dissension, these four, and also Deceit, Neglect and
Conjuring,—these seven in all are the means of success against an
enemy.’

Do. (I7.60-61).—‘The king conversant with the virtues of conciliation,
should employ it whenever he likes. At first he should employ the policy
of Presents, and then Conciliation and Dissension.—The policy of
Conciliation without the support of the policy of resents seldom brings
success in an undertaking; it cannot produce the desired eiīeet, even
when employed towards one’s own wife.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतस्मिन् राजमण्डल इमाश् चतस्रो जाजप्रकृतयो मुख्या भवन्ति, **विजिगीषुर्** **अरिर् मध्य** **उदासीन** इति । तत्रैतेषाम् एव यो राजप्रकृतिसंपन्नो ऽहम् एवेमां पृथिवीं जेष्य इत्य् अभ्युक्षितः स **विजिगीषुर्** उत्साहशक्तियोगात् । **शत्रुस्** त्रिविधः, सहजः [प्राकृतः कृत्रिमो भूम्यनन्तर इति । मध्यमः, अनयोर् अरिविजिगीष्वोर् असंहतयोर् निग्रहसमर्थः । उदासीनो ऽरिविजिगीषुमध्यमानाम् असंहतानाम् ॥ ७.१५५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

155	On the conduct of the middlemost (prince), on the doings of him who seeks conquest, on the behaviour of the neutral (king), and (on that) of the foe (let him) sedulously (meditate).
</details>
