+++
title = "201 जित्वा सम्पूजयेद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having gained victory, he shall worship the gods and the righteous Brāhmaṇas, grant remissions and proclaim amnesties.—(201).
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२८१]:
     J: parihārārthaṃ

येन केनचित् प्रकारेण जित्वारिं[^२८२] लब्धप्रशमनम् इदम् । अतो ऽस्मिन्[^२८३] पुरे जनपदे **देवब्राह्मणांश् च धार्मिकान्** विहितानुष्ठायिनो[^२८४] यथासामर्थ्यात् प्रतिषिद्धवर्जं कामात् स्वातन्त्र्येणारीन् जित्वा साध्यप्रवृत्तादिकं गन्धधूपपुष्पद्रव्यं सविभागास्फोटनादिसंस्कारद्वारेण यथार्हम् अभ्यर्चयेत् । कुटुम्बिनां परिहारार्थं स्थितिर् यथाप्रवृत्तिविशिष्टकरभारशुल्कप्रदेशानां प्रदानेन तथा तया वा संवत्सरम् एको द्वौ वा दद्यात् । उच्चानां च पौरजानपदबलानाम्[^२८५] आतपादिडिण्डिमकगदापातेन ख्यापयेत् "तैर् यैः स्वाम्यनुरागाद् अस्थानम् अपचितं तेषाम् अप्य् आ रक्षान्तं[^२८६] यथास्वं स्वं व्यापारम् अनुतिष्ठन्तु" इति ॥ ७.२०१ ॥


[^२८६]:
     DK (4: 2820) suggests: teṣāṃ mayā kṣāntam


[^२८५]:
     M G: paurajanapadabalatānām


[^२८४]:
     M G: vihitānuṣṭhānino


[^२८३]:
     M G: yasmin


[^२८२]:
     M G place this phrase at the end of the commentary on verse 200

_एवम् अनुग्रहे क्रियमाणे ऽपि यदा पौरजानपदानाम् अन्येषां वा_[^२८७]_ स्वाम्यनुरागाद् अहं वक्तृतैजसभावो बहुमतः स्याद् इति मन्येत मदीयस्य दण्डो ऽवस्थातुं न शक्नुयात् तदा ।_


[^२८७]:
     M G omit: vā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

After the enemy has been defeated and quiet has been restored in the
captured city, and among the people—‘he s hall worship *the gods and the
righteous Brāhmaṇas*’—*i.e*. those who perform all the acts that are
enjoined for the Brāhmaṇa, and who, as much as lies in their power,
avoid all that is forbidden. He shall make offerings of sandal-paint,
flowers, incense and so forth, with due apportionment and after proper
purification of the things offered.

‘*Grant remissions*’.—For the safety of householders, in order that
their livelihood may not suffer, he shall remit such portions of the
taxes as may be too burdensome for them, not realising them for one or
two years.

‘*Proclaim amnesties*’.—He shall make it known among the people of the
city and the villages—by means of the beat of drum or the felling of the
mace and such other means—that what they had done by virtue of their
loyalty to their former master had been forgiven and that henceforward
every one of them was free to take to his own calling.—(201).

If even after the bestowing of such fanours he finds that the citizens
and the people are still so loyal to their former master that they still
cherish feelings of attachment towards his dynasty, and that any
government of his own would not be lasting,—then, he shall do as
follows:—
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Parihāra*’—‘Exemptions from taxes and custom-dues etc.’
(Medhātithi);—‘gifts to the gods and Brāhmaṇas’ (Govindarāja and
Kullūka);—‘gifts of clothes and ornaments to the inhabitants’
(Rāghavānanda).

“The term ‘*parihāra*’ occurs very frequently in the inscriptions (see
*e*. *g*., Arch. Reports of Western India, Vol. IV, p.104 *et*.
*seq*),and means ‘exemption from, taxes and payments as well as other
immunities’. These *parihāras* were regularly attached to all grants to
Brāhmaṇas or temples”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 403) in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 409), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Jitvā*,’ ‘having conquered the enemy’s territories’,—‘*devān
dhārmikān brāhmaṇān*’—*i*.*e*., those inhabiting the conquered
country—‘*sampūjayet*’,—‘he should worship’, *i*.*e*., ‘offer them
lands, gold, presents and honours’;—‘*parihārān*’ means ‘explanations of
his own action in conquering the country, such as it was not through
greed for conquest that I have conquered this kingdom, this king of
yours wronged me deeply, that is why I have conquered him—thereby
showing that he is not to blame;—or ‘*paṛhāra*’ may mean ‘gifts’, such
proclamations, for instance, as ‘all the gold and wealth that I have won
I present to the Brāhmaṇas’;—similary he should proclaim such amnesty as
‘all those who, through loyalty to their late king, acted against, me,
only did their duty, and they need not fear any retaliation from me’.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 73 a).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.7, 801, *et seq*.).—‘When a territory has been acquired,
the king should grant maintenances for the conquered king himself; half
of it to his son, and a quarter of it to his wife; the rest of the
income he shall retain for himself. He should maintain the dispossessed
princes for the display of his own majesty, by the bestowal of honours,
if they are well-behaved; but punish them, if they are wicked.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

201	When he has gained victory, let him duly worship the gods and honour righteous Brahmanas, let him grant exemptions, and let him cause promises of safety to be proclaimed.
</details>
