+++
title = "+161"

+++

<details><summary>सायण-भाष्यम्</summary>

‘ किमु श्रेष्ठः' इति चतुर्दशर्चं पञ्चमं सूक्तं दैर्घतमसमार्भवम् । अन्त्या त्रिष्टुप् शिष्टास्त्रिष्टुबन्तपरिभाषया जगत्यः । अनुक्रान्तं च - किमु श्रेष्ठः षळूनार्भवं त्रिष्टुबन्तम्' इति । व्यूळ्हे दशरात्रे षष्ठेऽहनि वैश्वदेवशस्त्रे आर्भवं निविद्धानं द्वि प्रतीकम् । तत्र 'किमु श्रेष्ठः' इत्येतदन्त्यवर्जं प्रतीकम् ।  ‘ व्यूळ्हश्चेत्' इति खण्डे सूत्रितं - किमु श्रेष्ठ उप नो वाजा इति त्रयोदशार्भवं चतस्रश्च' (आश्व. श्रौ. ८. ८) इति ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Jamison Brereton</summary>

161  
R̥bhus  
Dīrghatamas Aucathya  
14 verses: jagatī 1–13, triṣṭubh 14  
This is a difficult hymn, but one essential for understanding the R̥bhus and their  relation to the Third Pressing. Its narrative tells how the R̥bhus attained immortal ity and entered among the gods—or seems to. This theme is stated in verse 2 and  elaborated in verses 11–14. The R̥bhus were priests who attained status as gods by  their sacrificial performance. As gods they are worshiped in the Third Pressing, and  therefore it is not surprising that the ritual acts by which they became gods are those  

of the Third Pressing. For a detailed discussion of these acts, see the discussion by  Brereton (2012).  
The hymn begins by reference to one of the great acts of the R̥bhus, their trans formation of a single soma cup into four soma cups. This act signifies their divin ization because the four cups represent four soma offerings to Indra and the three  R̥bhus. A single cup would have restricted the soma offering only to Indra. The  hymn opens with the R̥bhus’ address to Agni, who has been sent by the gods. This  dialogue takes place in the middle of the action, for apparently Agni has pointed  to the camasá, the ritual soma cup, and the R̥bhus are concerned that Agni thinks  that they have insulted this soma cup in some way (vs. 1). But Agni reaffirms the  command of the gods that the R̥bhus create four cups out of this one, and he  offers to make them gods (vs. 2). However, the R̥bhus reply that they have much  more to do as priests before they themselves become the objects of worship. First,  they need to make a horse. Elsewhere they fashion the two horses of Indra, and it  is to this act that verse 3 likely refers. The making of these horses points toward  the Hāriyojanagraha, an offering to Indra as he harnesses his horses to leave the  ritual ground at the end of the Third Pressing (see also I.61–63, 82). Second,  they need to make a chariot, which can represent the hymn or the whole ritual.  Third, they need to make a milk-cow, which represents the already-pressed soma  stalks, which are made to yield additional soma in the Third Pressing. And finally  they need to make young two who are old. The two might be the sacrificer and  his wife or another pair. Once the R̥bhus have accomplished all their great sac  
rificial deeds, then they will be worthy to follow Agni to heaven (vs. 3). Tvaṣṭar  is introduced in verse 4 probably in connection with another rite in the Third  Pressing in which the Wife of the Sacrificer receives indirect access to the soma.  Verse 5 returns to the four cups and we now learn that Tvaṣṭar, who had origi  
nally made the one cup, is angry that the R̥bhus are modifying his creation. The  R̥bhus protect themselves by taking on “other names.” These “other names” may  be their priestly offices, and by these names or priestly offices the “maiden” will  rescue them. The hymn gives little clue to identity of the “maiden,” but she may  be Sarasvatī (cf. VI.49.7) or even Speech (Vāc) herself. In either case, the words  that the R̥bhus master or the knowledge that they possess somehow protects them  from the anger of Tvaṣṭar. Vs. 6 affirms that the R̥bhus did succeed in becoming  gods and divine recipients of soma.  
In verse 7 the hymn returns to the sacrificial acts that made them immortal: the  soma-pressing (see vs. 10), the rejuvenation of the aging pair, the creation of a  horse, and the harnessing of the chariot that is the sacrifice or the hymn. Verse 8  marks a return to a dialogue, now between the R̥bhus and the gods. According to  Sāyaṇa, the “water” and the “rinse-water of muñja-reeds” that the gods offer the  R̥bhus are the soma of the first two pressings. This interpretation is contextually  justifiable, but such a denigration of these first two pressings is unlikely. Oldenberg  suggests that the gods first offer the R̥bhus two inferior drinks and only then and  finally the soma. If we take this approach, the first offering would be water, and the second might be a kind of faux-soma. The word múñja approximates mū́javant,  the mountain from which the real soma comes, and therefore the “rinse-water of  muñja-reeds” may represent an inferior approximation of soma. It is only the third  time and in the third soma-pressing that the gods offer the R̥bhus the real soma.  Structurally verse 9 continues verse 8, since again three things are mentioned, of  which the third is the best. However, it is difficult to say what the feminine noun  described as vadharyántī “weapon-wielding” in pāda c might be, since the adjec  
tive is otherwise unattested. According to Sāyaṇa, it is either the earth or a line of  clouds and its weapon is lightning. Along similar lines, Geldner suggests that it is  the rainy season and again that its weapon is lightning. Interpreting vadharyántī slightly differently, Witzel and Gotō understand it as the axe (svádhiti) “serving  as a weapon.” We resolve the ellipsis by drawing its sense from the verb pra √brū  
“proclaim” in pāda c and the reference to spoken truths in pāda d. The first two  R̥bhus praise water and fire, which are essential to the sacrifice, but the third R̥bhu  recognizes true speech as the most essential element.  
Verse 10 returns once again to the great sacrificial deeds of the R̥bhus and this  time especially to the soma that is prepared in the Third Pressing. In the Third  Pressing soma stalks from the first two pressings are pressed again to yield addi tional soma. In verse 10 these stalks are the “lame cow”—lame because they have  already been pressed—which are then soaked in water. The “carving” of the cow is  the re-pressing of the stalks, and the dung is the now thoroughly mangled stems of  the soma plant. The place of 10d is not clear. Whoever the “parents” may be, the  “sons” are likely the R̥bhus or the priests that they represent.  
The last sequence of verses, 11–14, probably describes the ascent of the R̥bhus  to immortality, but even if this is correct, the details are obscure. At best we can  point out a few possible identifications and a few possible interpretations. Agohya  in verse 11 is probably the Sun as the “Unconcealable One,” although he might also  be Savitar. In I.110.2–3 the R̥bhus’ attainment of immortality is connected with  Agohya, and if Agohya is the Sun, then perhaps one stage in the R̥bhus’ ascent is to  the sun. The Sun governs the year, and therefore the “grass on the heights” may rep  
resent the summer pasturage, and “the waters in the valleys” the winter pasturage.  In verse 13 the identification of the goat and the dog as the sun and moon is doubt ful. It assumes that the bastá “goat” is ajá ekapád, “the one-footed goat,” which  elsewhere is the Sun. The identification of the moon as “the dog” follows Śatapatha  Brāhmaṇa XI.1.5.1, in which the moon is called the heavenly dog. In the last verse,  the gods move throughout the visible world seeking the R̥bhus, but perhaps they do  not find them because they have gone from the visible world.
</details>

<details><summary>Geldner</summary>

Die Ribhu`s:
</details>
