+++
title = "04 अपरम् भवतो"

+++
4.4 Arjuna said According to the calculation of time, your birth was
indeed later, contemporaneous with our births. And the birth of Vivasvan
was at an earlier time, reckoned as twenty-eight cycles of units of four
Yugas each. How can I understand as true that you taught it in the
beginning; Now, there is no contradiction here, for it was ite possible
that He had taught Vivasvan in a former birth. The memory of what was
done in former births is ite natural for great men. This should not be
taken to mean that Arjuna does not know the son of Vasudeva, the
speaker, as the Lord of all. Because he (Arjuna) says later on: 'You are
the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Light and the Supreme Purifier. All the
seers proclaim You as the eternal Divine Purusa, the Primal Lord, unborn
and all-pervading. So also proclaim the divine sage Narada, Asita,
Devala and Vyasa. You Yourself also are saying this to me' (10.12-13.)
Arjuna had heard repeatedly from Bhisma and others during the Rajasuya
sacrifice of Yudhisthira, 'Krsna alone is the cause of creation and
submergence of all the worlds. This universe, consisting of things both
animate and inanimate, was created for the sake of Krsna' (Ma. Bha.,
2.38.23) 'The entire universe is subservient to Krsna' is the meaning of
'For the sake of Krnsa'. This apparent contradiction may be explained as
follows: Arjuna surely knows the son of Vasudeva as the Bhagavan. Though
knowing Him as such, he estions as if he did not know Him. This is his
intention. Can the birth of the Lord of all, who is antagonistic to all
that is evil and wholly auspicious, omniscient, whose will is always
true and whose desires are fulfilled - can the birth of such a Person be
of the same nature as that of the gods, men etc., who are subject to
Karma; Or can it be false like the illusions of a magical show; Or could
it be real; In other words, is the birth of the Supreme Being as the
incarnate a real fact or a mere illusory phenomenon produced by a
magician's art; If His birth is real, what is the mode of His birth;
What is the nature of His body; What is the manner of His birth; What is
the nature of this body of His; What is the casue of His birth; To what
end is He born; The way in which Sri Krsna answers Arjuna's estion,
justifies the construing of his estion in this way.
