+++
title = "06 अजोऽपि सन्नव्ययात्मा"

+++
4.6 Without forsaking any of the My special alities, as supreme
rulership, birthless, imperishability etc., I am born by My free will.
Prakrti means one's own nature. The meaning is that by employment of My
own Nature and taking a form of My choice, I incarnate by My own will
(Maya). The character of My own Nature becomes evident from the
following Srutis: 'Him who is of sun-like colour, beyond darkness
(Tamas)' (Sve. U., 3.8), 'Him who abides beyond Rajas (active matter)'
(Sama 17.1.4.2); 'This Golden Person who is within the sun' (Cha. U.
1.6.6); 'Within the heart, there is the Person consisting of mind,
immortal and golden' (Tai. U. 1.6.1); 'All mortal creatures have come
from the self-luminous Person' (Yaj., 32.2); 'Whose form is light, whose
will is truth, who is the self of ethereal space, who contains all
actions, contains all desires, contains all odours, contains all tastes'
(Cha. U., 3.14.2); 'Like a raiment of golden colour' (Br. U., 4.3.6).
'Atma-mayaya' means through the Maya which belongs to Myself. Here the
term Maya is identical with knowledge as stated in the lexicon of Yaska:
'Maya is wisdom, knowledge.' Further there is the usage of competent
people: 'By Maya, He knows the good and bad of his creatures.' Hence by
My own knowledge means 'by My will.' Hence, without abandoning My
essential attributes which belong to Me the Lord of all, such as being
free of sins, having auspicious attributes etc., and creating My own
form similar to the configuration of gods, men etc., I incarnate in the
form of gods etc. The Sruti teaches the same thing: 'Being unborn, He is
born in various forms' (Tai. A., 3.12.7). The purport is that His birth
is ite unlike that of ordinary beings. The dissimilarity consists in
that He is born out of His own will unlike ordinary beings whose birth
is necessitated by their Karma. Thus constured, there is no
contradiction also between what was taught earlier and what is taught
later as in the statements: 'Many births of Mine have passed, O Arjuna,
and similarly yours also. I know them all' (4.5); 'I incarnate Myself'
(4.7); and 'He who thus knows in truth My birth and work' (4.9). \[All
this elaboration is meant to refute the doctrine of mere apparency of
incarnations as taught by the Advaitins. Ramanuja, as stated in his
Introduction to the Bhasya, upholds the absolute reality of
incarnations.\] Sri Krsna now specifies the times of His incarnations.
