+++
title = "14 न माम्"

+++
4.14 These actions of varied nature like creation etc., do not
contaminate Me i.e., do not bind Me. For the distinctions of gods, men
etc., are not brought about by Me, but by the particular Karmas, good
and evil, of created beings. Therefore by the process of discriminating
between the acired and the inherent, it will be found that I am not the
author of this varied creations etc. The created or embodied selves, who
are endowed with bodies and organs at the time of creation in accordance
with their own Karmas springing from attachment to fruits etc.,
experience all enjoyments available in creation. Thus for them (embodied
selves) alone there is desire for the results of creation etc., and for
the results of their Karmas. There is no desire in Me for it. The
Sutrakara says to the same effect: 'No partiality or cruelty on account
of there being dependence (on the Karma of souls for inealities' (Br.
S., 2.1.34). Bhagavan Parasara also says so: 'He (the Lord) is only the
operative cause in the creation of beings. That from which the creative
forces spring constitutes the material cause. Leaving aside the material
cause, the being that becomes embodied does not reire the help of any
other thing whatever. A thing is led into the condition in which it is,
O best of ascetics, only by its own potentiality' (V. P., 1.4.51-2). The
Supreme Person is only the operative cause with regard to the creation
of those to be created, i.e., the selves in the bodies of gods etc. The
material cause for the differences into gods etc., is the potentiality
in the form of previous Karmas of the selves to be created. Therefore,
leaving aside the operative cause, i.e., the Supreme Person, the
creator, the embodied beings do not reire anything else for causing
difference into conditions of gods etc. For these selves are led to take
the forms of gods etc., by the potentiality of their own old Karma with
which they are connected. Such is the meaning. He who knows Me thus to
be the agent of creation etc., and still a non-agent, i.e., as one who
has no desire for the results of the acts of creation etc., - such a
person is not tied by previous actions, i.e., he is freed from the old
Karmas which obstruct the undertaking of Karma Yoga by causing
attachment to results. Such is the purport.
