+++
title = "18 कर्मण्यकर्म यः"

+++
4.18 Here by the term 'non-action', the knowledge of the self, which is
distinct from action and which forms the subject under consideration, is
meant. 'He who sees non-action in action and also action in non-action,'
denotes him who can perceive knowledge of the self even while action is
being performed and who can also perceive action while engaged in
non-action, i.e., knowledge of the self. What is the import of this
saying; What is taught here is this: One can perceive, by constant
contemplation on the truth about the self, that the action that is being
performed in itself is a form of knowledge. One can also perceive that
this knowledge is also of the form of Karma because of its being
contained in Karma Yoga. Both these (i.e., action in the form of
knowledge and knowledge in the form of actions) are accomplished by
contemplation on the true nature of the self, even while work is being
performed. Thus, he who can see actions as included in contemplation on
the reality of the self, is wise, i.e., he knows the full meaning of the
Sastras; he is fit among men, i.e., fit to attain release. He alone has
fulfilled all actions, i.e., carried out the entire purpose of the
Sastras. \[The purport is that no contradiction between knowledge and
action is felt by one who knows the philosophy of the self\]. How is the
form of knowledge accomplished through works which are obviously
activities that are being performed; Sri Krsna explains:
