+++
title = "24 ब्रह्मार्पणम्"

+++
4.24 The expression 'Brahman is the instrument to offer with' (It is to
be remembered that in Ramanuja's system 'Brahman' in the primary sense
is the 'Whole' with the Supreme Being as the Soul and Atmans and Matter
(Prakrti) as His body in inseparable union with the Whole. So the word
'Brahman' can, according to the needs of each context, be used to
indicate the Supreme Being, the Atman, or Prakrti; In verse 24 it has
been used in all these senses. We have therefore put it in italics. See
Introduction.) is adjectival to 'the oblation'. That by which an
offering is given, such as a ladle, is an Arpana. It is called Brahman
because it is an effect of Brahman, Brahman being the material cause of
the universe. 'Brahmaarpanam' is the oblation, of which the instrument
is Brahman. The oblation, just like the instrument with which it is
offered, is also Brahman. It is offered by the agent Brahman into the
fire of Brahman. He is the Brahma-karma-samadhi who contemplates thus on
all acts as filled with the Supreme Brahman or as having the Supreme
Brahman as the Self. He who contemplates on Brahman as the Soul of all
actions, reaches Brahman alone, as his own self has the Supreme Brahman
as Its Self. The meaning is that the individual self - which is Brahman
because of Its having Brahman as Its Self - has to realise Its own real
nature. All actions performed by an aspirant for release have the form
of knowledge because of their association with the contemplation of the
Supreme Brahman as their self. They are a direct means for the vision of
the self without the meditation of Jnana Yoga. Thus, Sri Krsna, after
explaining how Karma takes the form of knowledge, now speaks of the
various kinds of Karma Yoga.
