+++
title = "35 यज्ज्ञात्वा न"

+++
4.35 Having which knowledge, you will not again fall into this delusion
of mistaking the body etc., for the self, which is the cause of
possessiveness etc. By this (knowledge) you will see in yourself all the
beings which appear in diversity of forms such as gods, men etc.; for
between you and other beings there is eality of nature when freed from
the hold of Prakrti, as your self and all other selves have the form of
knowledge as fas as their essence is concerned. Sri Krsna will later on
instruct that the nature of the self, dissociated from the evil of
contact with Prakrti, is eal in all beings. 'For faultless Brahman
(individual self) is alike everywhere; therefore, abide in Brahman'
(5.19). And then you will see all beings without any exception in Me,
because of the similarity of nature of the pure selves with one another
and with My nature. For Sri Krsna will teach later on: 'Resorting to
this knowledge and partaking of My nature' (14.5). So the euality of the
selves, devoid of name and form, with the nature of the Supreme, is
known from the texts like: 'Then the wise, shaking off good and evil,
stainless, attain supreme eality' (Mun. U., 3.1.3). Therefore all selves
dissociated from Prakrti are eal in nature to one another and eal in
nature to the Lord of all. \[The idea is that blissfulness is the basic
nature of all selves. Blissfulness (Ananda) is the nature of the Supreme
Being also. Eality contemplated is in this respect only, but not in
power of creation, which belongs only to Isvara\]
