+++
title = "03 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
3.3 The Lord said You have not properly understood what I taught you
before. In this world, full of people with varying degrees of
alifications, I have taught in the days of yore two ways, that of
knowledge (Jnana Yoga) and that of works, according to the alifications
of aspirants. There is no contradiction in this. It is not possible for
all people of the world in whom the desire for release has arisen, to
become capable immediately for the practice of Jnana Yoga. But he who
performs the worship of the Supreme Person without desire for fruits and
thery gets completely rid of inner impurities and keeps his senses
unagitated - he becomes competent for the path of knowledge. That all
activities are for performing the worship of the Supreme Person will be
taught in the Gita verse, 'He from \`whom the activities of all beings
arise and by whom all this is pervaded - by worshipping Him with his
duty man reaches perfection' (18.46). Earlier also performance of
activities without any attachment to the fruits is enjoined by the verse
beginning with. 'You have the right to work alone ৷৷.' (2.47). Next for
those whose intellect has been redeemed by this kind of discipline, is
enjoined Jnana Yoga by the words, 'When a man renounces all the desires
৷৷.' (2.55). Conseently, firm devotion to Jnana Yoga is taught only to
the Sankhyas, i.e., those persons who are competent to follow the
discipline of the knowledge of the self, and Karma Yoga to Yogins, i.e.,
to those competent for the path of work. Sankhya means Buddhi and those
who are endowed with the Buddhi (intellectual or mental disposition)
having only the self for its object, are Sankhyans. Therefore those who
are not fit for this are alified for Karma Yoga. Those who are possessed
of Buddhi which is agitated by objects of the senses, are the persons
alified for Karma Yoga, whereas those whose Buddhi is not thus agitated,
are alified for Jnana Yoga. Therefore nothing contradictory and
confusing is taught. It is said in the next stanza that Jnana Yoga is
difficult to practise all at once, even when the desire for release
arises in any worldy person:
