+++
title = "08 नियतङ् कुरु"

+++
3.8 'Obligatory' (Niyatam) means 'concomitant' (Vyaptam); for action is
concomitant with that which is conjoined with Prakrti or the body. The
contact with Prakrti has arisen from beginingless subtle impressions
(Vasanas). You must perform work, because the performance of action is
easy and may not cause accidents by reason of its being obligatory.
Action is superior to non-action, i.e., even to the devotee of Jnana.
Because of the instruction at the beginning (of this context), 'No man
experiences freedom from activity' (3.4), devotion to Jnana alone is
indicated by the word, 'Non-action' (Akarma). Even in the case of one
alified for devotion to Jnana, devotion to Karma indeed is better
because Jnana-nistha is difficult to perform and liable to accidents, as
it has not been practised previoulsy and as it does not come to one
naturally. Subseently it will be described how, one with the knowledge
of the true nature of the self can carry on actions along with that
knowledge. Conseently, we should take the meaning here to be that,
because knowledge of the self too is included in Karma Yoga, this kind
of Yoga is superior. This statement on the superiority of activity
(Karma Yoga) over Jnana Yoga is valid even when there is competency for
one to adopt Jnana Yoga. For, if you abandon all activities to alify
yourself for Jnana Yoga, then, for you, who is thus inactive while
following Jnana Yoga, even the nourishment of the body, which is
necessary even for Jnana-nistha, will not be achieved. The body has to
be necessarily sustained until the means are executed to the full.
Performing 'great sacrifices' with the help of honestly earned wealth,
the body should be sustained by consuming the remainders left after such
sacrifices. This is made clear from scriptural texts like, 'When the
food is pure, the Sattva (mind or inner organ) becomes pure; when the
Sattva is pure, then the remembrance (meditation) will be steady' (Cha.
U., 7.26.2). Sri Krsna himself will declare: 'The sinful ones who cook
food for their own sake eat sin (3.13). Conseently,even the sustenance
of the body will not be possible in the case of one who practises
Jnana-nistha, and does not act. In other ways also Karma Yoga is
superior to Jnana Yoga even in respect of one who is alified for
Jnana-nistha; for, obligatory and occasional rites like the 'great
sacrifices' must be carried out by one who follows Jnana Yoga too, as he
has to sustain the body until he attains perfection. Besides, the
understanding of the true nature of the self is incorporated in Karma
Yoga, as it involves the contemplation of the self as being a non-agent.
It is also in line with the nature of life (Prakrti). Karma Yoga, is for
these reasons easier and it is free from danger of downfall. Therefore,
you must perform Karma Yoga only. This is the purport of the verse. If
it is contended that any action such as earning money implies 'I-ness',
'My-ness' etc., and will therefore be disturbing to the senses, and that
such a person devoted often to works will be in bondage through subtle
impressions of his acts, Sri Krsna says:
