+++
title = "16 एवम् प्रवर्तितम्"

+++
3.16 Thus this wheel is set in motion by the Supreme Person: From food
arise embodied selves which are denoted by the word 'beings': from rain
food; from sacrifice rain; sacrifice from activities which constitute
the exercise of an agent; and activity from the embodied self; and again
the body endowed with life from food. In this manner there is a seence
which revolves like a wheel through the mutual relations of cause and
effect. Hence, He who is engaged in spiritual practice - whether one is
alified for Karma Yoga or Jnana Yoga - if he does not follow, i.e., does
not keep in motion the wheel which revolves in a circle through mutual
relation of cause and effect - that person by not maintaining his bodily
subsistence by means of the 'remainder of sacrifice,' lives in sin. His
life begins in sin or develops in sin, or is of both these kinds; he
lives the life of sin. Thus he is a reveller in his senses and not in
his self. The senses become the pleasure-gardens of one whose mind and
body are not nourished by the 'remainders of sacrifices.' Rajas and
Tamas preponderate in his body. Being thus turned away from the vision
of the self, he rejoices only in the enjoyment of the senses. Therefore,
even if he were to attempt for the vision of the self, it will be
fruitless. So he lives in vain, O Arjuna. Sri Krsna now says that there
is no need for the performance of the 'great sacrifices' etc., according
to his station and stage of life, only in respect of a liberated person
whose vision of the self does not depend on any external means.
