+++
title = "29 प्रकृतेर्गुणसम्मूढाः"

+++
3.29 Those who 'do not know the whole truth' are those persons who are
trying for the vision of the self but are deluded about the nature of
the self, not knowing, on account of their involvement in Prakrti, that
actions proceed from the Gunas of Prakrti. They are therefore attached
to the actions of the Gunas - i.e., only to actions forming part of
Karma Yoga. They are alified only for Karma Yoga. One who knows the
complete truth should not, by himself remaining a practitioner of Jnana
Yoga, unsettle those persons who are ignorant and who do not know the
complete truth. Those, the ignorant, who tend to follow the behaviour of
a great man, when they see him transcend Karma Yoga, will have their
minds shaken from Karma Yoga. Thus, the great man, should himself remain
established in Karma Yoga, while having the full knowledge of the true
nature of the self and contemplating on the self as not being the agent.
Thus he should demonstrate that Karma Yoga by itself is an autonomous
means for the vision of the self. He should create in those who do not
know the complete truth the love of Karma Yoga. The superiority of this
Karma Yoga over Jnana Yoga even for those who are alified for Jnana Yoga
has already been stated. Therefore one who is a respected person of note
should follow this Karma Yoga alone for the good of the world. The
method of performing actions after attributing agency to the Gunas by
discerning the nature of the self as different from Prakrti, has been
taught. The agency of the self is not produced by the inherent nature of
the self, but by its contact with the Gunas. Hence by discriminating
between what is obtained by contact and not obtained when there is no
contact, it has to be understood that this agency is due to the Gunas or
Prakrti. Now it is said that the agency of works, first attributed to
Gunas, ultimately go to the Supreme Person who is the Self of all. It is
done by discerning that the nature of the individual self is one of
subservience to the Supreme Person, as they constitute His body:
