+++
title = "30 मयि सर्वाणि"

+++
3.30 Do all prescribed acts such as war etc., (here a duty) free from
desire or selfishness and devoid of fear, with a mind focussed on the
self. Surrender all acts to Me, the Lord of all, who constitutes the
inner pervading Self of all beings. 'Adhyatma-cetas' is that mind which
is focussed on the self by knowledge of the essential nature of the self
as declared in hundreds of Vedic texts. That this individual self
constitutes the body of the Supreme Self and is actuated by Him, is
taught by Sruti texts like: 'He who has entered within, is the ruler of
all beings and is the Self of all' (Tai. Ar., 3.11), 'Him who has
entered inside and is the doer' (Ibid., 3.23), 'He who, dwelling in the
self, is within the self, whom the Self does not know, whose body is the
self, who controls the self from within - He is your internal ruler and
Immortal Self' (Br. U., 3.7.22). Smrti texts also speak in the same
manner: 'Him who is the ruler of all' (Manu, 12.122). Sri Krsna will say
later on: 'And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory,
knowledge and the faculty of reason' (15.15); 'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives
in the heart of everything causing them to spin round and round by His
power, as if set on a wheel' (18.61). Hence, dedicate to Me, the Supreme
Person, all actions considering them as done by Me, by contemplating on
the self as actuated by Me by reason of Its constituting My body. And do
every thing, considering the actions as My worship only; becoming free
from desire for fruits and therefore free from selfishness as regards
actions, engage in acts like war etc., devoid of 'fever', i.e., the
excitement caused by passions like anger. Contemplate that the Supreme
Person, Lord of all, Principal of all, gets done His own works only for
the purpose of getting Himself worshipped with His own instruments,
namely, the individual selves which belong to Him and are His agents.
Become free from selfish attachment to action. Also be free from the
feverish concern originating from such thoughts as 'What will become of
me with an ancient, endless accumulation of evil arising from
beginningless time;' Perform Karma Yoga with ease, for the Supreme
Person Himself, worshipped by acts, will free you from bondage. His
Lordship and Principalship over all are settled by Sruti texts like:
'Him who is the supreme and great Lord of lords, Him the Supreme
Divinity of divinities' (Sve. U., 6.7), 'The Lord of the Universe' (Tai.
Na., 11.3), 'The Supreme Ruler of rulers' (Sve. U., 6.6-7). Isvaratva is
the same as Sesitva, which means controllership. Sri Krsna declares that
this alone is the essential meaning of the Upanisads:
