+++
title = "32 ये त्वेतदभ्यसूयन्तो"

+++
3.32 But those who do not follow this view of Mine, namely, that the
self has Me for Its support, is subservient to Me and is actuated by Me
only, i.e., those who do not perform all acts contemplating in this way
as also those who have no faith in the meaning of the Sastras and
calumniate them - know them to be extremely deluded and devoid of
reasoning and knowledge and conseently completely lost. For, the
function of the mind is the determination of the real nature of things,
and in its absence, those mentioned above are devoid of reason, and
therefore apostates in knowledge and extremely deluded in all ways. For
one united with the Prakrti (body), the sense of agency results from the
preponderance of the Gunas of Prakrti. But this agency really rests with
the Supreme Person. Contemplating thus, Karma Yoga alone should be
practised by both - those who are competent for Karma Yoga only and
those who are competent for Jnana Yoga. The implied superiority of Karma
Yoga has the following justifications; it is easy to perform, free from
liability to lapse, and independent of anything else; it comprises the
knowledge of the self also within its scope. On the other hand Jnana
Yoga is difficult to practise, is not free from the liability to lapse,
leaves one dependent on actions for the sustenance of the body etc. And
for a distinguished perosn, this (i.e., Karma Yoga) is especially what
ought to be practised. Next, till the end of this chapter, it is
explained how Jnana Yoga, being difficult, is liable to lead to lapses.
