+++
title = "10 तमुवाच हृषीकेशः"

+++
2.9 - 2.10 Sanjaya said Thus, the Lord, the Supreme Person, introduced
the Sastra regarding the self for the sake of Arjuna - whose natural
courage was lost due to love and compassion in a misplaced situation,
who thought war to be unrighteous even though it was the highest duty
for warriors (Ksatriyas), and who took refuge in Sri Krsna to know what
his right duty was -, thinking that Arjuna's delusion would not come to
an end except by the knowledge of the real nature of the self, and that
war was an ordained duty here which, when freed from attachment to
fruits, is a means for self-knowledge. Thus, has it been said by Sri
Yamunacarya: 'The introduction to the Sastra was begun for the sake of
Arjuna, whose mind was agitated by misplaced love and compassion and by
the delusion that righteousness was unrighteousness, and who took refuge
in Sri Krsna.' The Supreme Person spoke these words as if smiling, and
looking at Arjuna, who was thus overcome by grief resulting from
ignorance about the real nature of the body and the self, but was
nevertheless speaking about duty as if he had an understanding that the
self is distinct from the body, and while he (Arjuna), torn between
contradictory ideas, had suddenly become inactive standing between the
two armies that were getting ready to fight. Sri Krsna said, as if in
ridicule, to Arjuna the words beginning with, 'There never was a time
when I did not exist' (II. 12), and ending with 'I will release you from
all sins; grieve not!' (XVIII. 66) - which have for their contents the
real nature of the self, of the Supreme Self, and of the paths of work
(Karma), knowledge (Jnana) and devotion (Bhakti) which constitute the
means for attaining the highest spiritual fulfilment.
