+++
title = "11 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
2.11 The Lord said You are grieving for those who do not deserve to be
grieved for. You also speak words of wisdom about the nature of the body
and the self as follows: 'The ancestors fall degraded, deprived of the
ritual oblations of food and water' (I. 42). There is no reason for such
grief for those who possess the knowledge of the nature of the body and
the self. Those who know the exact truth will not grieve for those
bodies from which life has departed and for those from whome the
principle of life has not departed. They do not grieve for bodies or
souls. Hence, in you this contradiction is visible - your grief at the
thought 'I shall slay them;' and at the same time your talk about
righteousness and unrighteousness, as if it were the result of knowledge
of the self as distinct from the body. Therefore you do not know the
nature of the body nor of the self which is distinct from the body and
is eternal. Nor do you know of duties like war etc., which (as duty)
constitute the means for the attainment of the self, nor of the fact
that this war (which forms a duty in the present context), if fought
without any selfish desire for results, is a means for the attainment of
the knowledge of the true nature of the self. The implied meaning is
this: This self, verily, is not dependent on the body for Its existence,
nor is It subjected to destruction on the death of the body, as there is
no birth or death for It. Therefore there is no cause for grief. But the
body is insentient by nature, is subject to change, and its birth and
death are natural; thus it (body) too is not to be grieved for. First
listen about the nature of the self.
