+++
title = "12 न त्वेवाहम्"

+++
2.12 Indeed, I, the Lord of all, who is eternal, was never non-existent,
but existed always. It is not that these selves like you, who are
subject to My Lordship, did not exist; you have always existed. It is
not that 'all of us', I and you, shall cease to be 'in the future',
i.e., beyond the present time; we shall always exist. Even as no doubt
can be entertainted that I, the Supreme Self and Lord of all, am
eternal, likewise, you (Arjuna and all others) who are embodied selves,
also should be considered eternal. The foregoing implies that the
difference between the Lord, the sovereign over all, and the individual
selves, as also the differences among the individual selves themselves,
are real. This has been declared by the Lord Himself. For, different
terms like 'I', 'you', 'these', 'all' and 'we' have been used by the
Lord while explaining the truth of eternality in order to remove the
misunderstanding of Arjuna who is deluded by ignorance. \[Now follows a
refutation of the Upadhi theory of Bhaskara and the Ignorance theory of
the Advaitins which deny any ultimate difference between the Lord and
the Jivas.\] If we examine (Bhaskara's) theory of Upadhis (adjuncts),
which states that the apparent differences among Jivas are due to
adjuncts, it will have to be admitted that mention about differences is
out of place when explaining the ultimate truth, because the theory
holds that there are no such differences in reality. But that the
differences mentioned by the Lord are natural, is taught by the Sruti
also: 'Eternal among eternals, sentient among sentients, the one, who
fulfils the desires of the many' (Sve. U. VI. 13, Ka. U. V. 13). The
meaning of the text is: Among the eternal sentient beings who are
countless, He, who is the Supreme Spirit, fulfils the desires of all.'
As regards the theory of the Advaitins that the perception of difference
is brought about by ignorance only and is not really real, the Supreme
Being - whose vision must be true and who, therefore must have an
immediate cognition of the differencelss and immutable and eternal
consciousness as constituting the nature of the Atman in all
authenticity, and who must thery be always free from all ignorance and
its effects - cannot possibly perceive the so-called difference arising
from ignornace. It is, therefore, unimaginable that He engages himself
in activities such as teaching, which can proceed only from such a
perception of differences arising from ignorance. The argument that the
Supreme Being, though possessed of the understanding of nom-duality, can
still have the awareness of such difference persisting even after
sublation, just as a piece of cloth may have been burnt up and yet
continues to have the appearance of cloth, and that such a continuance
of the subltated does not cause bondage - such an argument is invalid in
the light of another analogy of a similar kind, namely, the perception
of the mirage, which, when understood to be what it is, does not make
one endeavour to fetch water therefrom. In the same way even if the
impression of difference negated by the non-dualistic illumination
persists, it cannot impel one to activities such as teaching; for the
object to whom the instruction is to be imparted is discovered to be
unreal. The idea is that just as the discovery of the non-existence of
water in a mirage stops all effort to get water from it, so also when
all duality is sublated by illumination, no activity like teaching
disciples etc., can take place. Nor can the Lord be conceived as having
been previously ignorant and as attaining knowledge of unity through the
scirptures, and as still being subject to the continuation of the
stultified experiences. Such a position would stand in contradiction to
the Sruti and the Smrti: 'He, who is all-comprehender' (Mun. U., 1. 1.
9); all knower and supreme and natural power of varied types are spoken
of in Srutis, such as knowledge, strength and action' (Sve. U. 6. 8); 'I
know, Arjuna, all beings of the past, present and future but no one
knows Me,' etc. (Gita 7. 26). And again, if the perception of difference
and distinction are said to persist even after the unitary Self has been
decisively understood, the estion will arise - to whom will the Lord and
the succession of teachers of the tradition impart the knowledge in
accordance with their understanding; The estion needs an answer. The
idea is that knowledge of non-duality and perception of differences
cannot co-exist. If it be replied by Advaitins holding the
Bimba-Pratibimba (the original and reflections) theory that teachers
give instructions to their own reflections in the form of disciples such
as Arjuna, it would amount to an absurdity. For, no one who is not out
of his senses would undertake to give any instruction to his own
reflections in mediums such as a precious stone, the blade of a sword or
a mirror, knowing, as he does, that they are non-different from himself.
The theory of the persistence of the sublated is thus impossible to
maintain, as the knowledge of the unitary self destroys the
beginningless ignorance in which differences falling outside the self
are supposed to be rooted. 'The persistence of the sublated' does occur
in cases such as the vision of the two moons, where the cause of the
vision is the result of some real defect in eyesight, nor removable by
the right understanding of the singleness of the moon. Even though the
perception of the two moons may continue, the sublated cognition is
rendered inconseential on the strength of strong contrary evidence. For,
it will not lead to any activity appropriate for a real experience. But
in the present context (i.e. the Advaitic), the conception of
difference, whose object and cause are admittedly unreal, is cancelled
by the knowledge of reality. So the 'persistence of the sublated' can in
no way happen. Thus, if the Supreme Lord and the present succession of
preceptors have attained the understanding of (Non-dual) reality, their
perception of difference and work such as teaching proceeding from that
perception, are impossible. If, on the other hand, the perception of
difference persists because of the continuance of ignorance and its
cause, then these teachers are themselves ignorant of the truth, and
they will be incapable of teaching the truth. Further, as the preceptor
has attained the knowledge of the unitary self and thery the ignorance
concerning Brahman and all the effects of such ignorance are thus
annihilated, there is no purpose in instructing the disciple. It it is
held that the preceptor and his knowledge are just in the imagination of
the disciple, the disciple and his knowledge are similarly the product
of the imagination of the preceptor, and as such can not put an end to
the ignorance in estion. If it is maintained that the disciple's
knowledge destroys ignorance etc., because it contradicts the antecedent
state of non-enlightenment, the same can be asserted of the preceptor's
knowledge. The futility of such teachings is obvious. Enough of these
unsound doctrines which have all been refuted.
