+++
title = "18 अन्तवन्त इमे"

+++
2.18 The root 'dih' means 'to grow.' Hence these bodies (Dehas) are
characterised by complexity. They have an end - their nature is
perishablity. For, jugs and such other things which are characterised by
complexity are seen to have an end. The bodies of the embodied self,
which are made of conglomerated elements, serve the purpose of
experiencing the effects of Karmas, as stated in Brh. U. IV. 4.5,
'Auspicious embodiments are got through good actions.' Such bodies
perish when Karmas are exhausted. Further the self is imperishable. Why;
Because it is not measurable. Neither can It be conceived as the object
of knowledge, but only as the subject (knower). It will be taught later
on: 'He who knows It is called the knower of the Field by those who know
this (13.1). Besides, the self is not seen to be made up of many
(elements). Because in the perception 'I am the knower' throughout the
body, only something other than the body is understood as possessing an
invariable form as the knower. Further, this knower cannot be
dismembered and seen in different places as is the case with the body.
Therefore the self is eternal, for (1) It is not a complex being of a
single form; (2) It is the knowing subject; and (3) It pervades all. On
the contrary, the body is perishable, because (1) it is complex; (2) it
serves the purpose of experiencing the fruits of Karma by the embodied
self; (3) it has a plurality of parts and (4) it can be pervaded.
Therefore, as the body is by nature perishable and the self by nature is
eternal, both are not objects fit for grief. Hence, bearing with courage
the inevitable strike of weapons, sharp or hard, liable to be received
by you and others, begin the action called war without being attached to
the fruits but for the sake of attaining immortality.
