+++
title = "27 जातस्य हि"

+++
2.27 For what has originated, destruction is certain - it is seen to be
inevitable. Similarly what has perished will inevitably originate. How
should this be understood - that there is origination for that
(entity)which has perished; It is seen that an existing entity only can
originate and not a non-existent one. Origination, annihilation etc.,
are merely particular states of an existent entity. Now thread etc., do
really exist. When arranged in a particular way, they are called clothes
etc. It is seen that even those who uphold the doctrine that the effect
is a new entity (Asatkarya-vadins) will admit this much that no new
entity over and above the particular arrangement of threads is seen. It
is not tenable to hold that this is the coming into being of a new
entity, since, by the process of manufacture there is only attainment of
a new name and special functions. No new entity emerges. Origination,
annihilation etc., are thus particular stages of an existent entity.
With regard to an entity which has entered into a stage known as
origination, its entry into the opposite condition is called
annihilation. Of an evolving entity, a seqence of evolutionary stages is
inevitable. For instance, clay becomes a lump, jug, a potsherd, and
(finally) powder. Here, what is called annihilation is the attainment of
a succeeding stage by an entity which existed previously in a preceding
stage. And this annihilation itself is called birth in that stage. Thus,
the seence called birth and annihilation being inevitable for an
evolving entity, it is not worthy of you to grieve. Now Sri Krsna says
that not even the slightest grief arising from seeing an entity passing
from a previous existing stage to an opposite stage, is justifiable in
regard to human beings etc.
