+++
title = "41 व्यवसायात्मिका"

+++
2.41 Here, i.e., in every ritual sanctioned by the scriptures, the
Buddhi or disposition of mind marked by resolution, is single. The
Buddhi marked by resolution is the Buddhi concerned with acts which must
be performed by one desirous of release (and not any kind of work). The
term 'Vyavasaya' menas unshakable conviction: this Buddhi (disposition
of mind) comes out of prior determination about the true nature of the
self. But the Buddhi concerning the performance of rituals of fulfill
certain desires, is marked by irresolution; because here only this much
knowledge of the self is sufficient - 'the self (as an entity) exists
differently from the body.' Such a general understanding is sufficient
to alify for performing acts giving fulfilment of certain desires. It
does not reire any definite knowledge about the true nature of the self.
For, even if there is no such knowledge, desires for heaven etc., can
arise, the means for their attainment can be adopted, and the experience
of those fruits can take place. For this reason there is no
contradiction in the teaching of the scriptures. \[The contradiction
negated here is how can the same scriptural acts produce different
results - fulfilment of desires and liberation. The difference in the
disposition of the mind accouts of it.\] The Buddhi (mental disposition)
marked by resolution has a single aim, because it relates to the
attainment of a single fruit. For, as far as one desiring release is
concerned, all acts are enjoined only for the accomplishment of that
single fruit. Therefore, since the purpose of the scriptures here is one
only (i.e., liberation), the Buddhi regarding all rituals taught in the
scriptures too is only one, as far as liberation-seekers are concerned.
For example, the set of six sacrifices, beginning with Agneya with all
their subsidiary processes (though enjoined in different passages) forms
the subject of a single injunction, as they are all for the attainment
of a single fruit. Conseently the Buddhi concerning these is one only.
The meaning of the verse under discussion must be construed in the same
manner. But the Buddhi of the irresolute ones who are engaged in rituals
for winning such fruits as heaven, sons, cattle, food etc., are endless,
frutis being endless. In rituals like Darsapurnamasa (new moon and full
moon sacrifice), even though attainment of a single fruit (heaven) is
enjoined, there accrues to these the character of having many branches
on account of the mention of many secondary fruits as evidenced by such
passages as, 'He desires a long life.' Therefore the Buddhi of
irresolute ones has many branches and are endless. The purport is: In
performing obligatory and occasional rituals, all fruits, primary and
secondary, promised in the scriptures, should be abandoned, with the
idea that release or salvation is the only purpose of all
scripture-ordained rituals. These rituals should be performed without
any thought of selfish gains. In addition, acts motivated by desires
(Kamya-karmas) also should be performed according to one's own capacity,
after abandoning all desire for fruits and with the conviction that they
also, when performed in that way, form the means for attainment of
release. They should be looked upon as eal to obligatory and occasional
rites suited to one's own station and stage in life. Sri Krsna condemns
those who perform acts for the attainment of objects of desire:
