+++
title = "43 कामात्मानः स्वर्गपरा"

+++
2.42 - 2.44 The ignorant, whose knowledge is little, and who have as
their sole aim the attainment of enjoyment and power, speak the flowery
language i.e., having its flowers (show) only as fruits, which look
apparently beautiful at first sight. They rejoice in the letter of the
Vedas i.e., they are attached to heaven and such other results (promised
in the Karma-kanda of the Vedas). They say that there is nothing else,
owing to their intense attachment to these results. They say that there
is no fruit superior to heaven etc. They are full of worldly desires and
their minds are highly attached to secular desires. They hanker for
heaven, i.e. think of the enjoyment of the felicities of heaven, after
which one can again have rirth which offers again the opportunity to
perform varied rites devoid of true knowledge and leads towards the
attainment of enjoyments and power once again. With regard to those who
cling to pleasure and power and whose understanding is contaminated by
that flowery speech relating to pleasure and lordly powers, the
aforesaid mental disposition characterised by resolution, will not arise
in their Samadhi. Samadhi here means the mind. The knowledge of the self
will not arise in such minds. In the minds of these persons, there
cannot arise the mental disposition that looks on all Vedic rituals as
means for liberation based on the determined conviction about the real
form of the self. Hence, in an aspirant for liberation, there should be
no attachment to rituals out of the conviction that they are meant for
the acisition of objects of desire only. It may be estioned why the
Vedas, which have more of love for Jivas than thousands of parents, and
which are endeavouring to save the Jivas, should prescribe in this way
rites whose fruits are infinitesimal and which produce only new births.
It can also be asked if it is proper to abandon what is given in the
Vedas. Sri Krsna replies to these estions.
