+++
title = "45 त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदा"

+++
2.45 The word Traigunya means the three Gunas - Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
Here the term Traigunya denotes persons in whom Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
are in abundance. The Vedas in prescribing desire-oriented rituals
(Kamya-karmas) have such persons in view. Because of their great love,
the Vedas teach what is good to those in whom Tamas, Rajas and Sattva
preponderate. If the Vedas had not explained to these persons the means
for the attainment of heaven etc., according to the Gunas, then those
persons who are not interested in liberation owing to absence of Sattva
and preponderance of Rajas and Tamas in them, would get completely lost
amidst what should not be resorted to, without knowing the means for
attaining the results they desire. Hence the Vedas are concerned with
the Gunas. Be you free from the three Gunas. Try to acire Sattva in
abundance; increase that alone. The purport is: do not nurse the
preponderance of the three Gunas in their state of inter-mixture; do not
cultivate such preponderance. Be free from the pairs of opposites; be
free from all the characteristics of worldly life. Abide in pure Sattva;
be established in Sattva, in its state of purity without the admixture
of the other two Gunas. If it is estioned how that is possible, the
reply is as follows. Never care to acire things nor protect what has
been acired. While abandoning the acisition of what is not reired for
self-realisation, abandon also the conservation of such things already
acired. You can thus be established in self-control and thery become an
aspirant after the essentail nature of the self. 'Yoga' is acisition of
what has not been acired; 'Ksema' is preservation of things already
acired. Abandoning these is a must for an aspirant after the essential
nature of the self. If you conduct yourself in this way, the
preponderance of Rajas and Tamas will be annihilated, and pure Sattva
will develop. Besides, all that is taught in the Vedas is not fit to be
utilised by all.
