+++
title = "72 एषा ब्राह्मी"

+++
2.72 This state of performing disinterested work which is preceded by
the knowledge of the eternal self and which is characterised by firm
wisdom, is the Brahmi-state, which secures the attainment of the Brahman
(the self). After attaining such a state, he will not be deluded, i.e.,
he will not get again the mortal coil. Reaching this state even during
the last years of life, he wins the blissful Brahman (the self) i.e.,
which is full of beatitude. The meaning is that he attains the self
which is constituted of nothing but bliss. Thus in the second chapter,
the Lord wanted to remove the delusion of Arjuna, who did not know the
real nature of the self and also did not realize that the activity named
'war' (here an ordained duty) is a means for attaining the nature of
Sankhya or the self. Arjuna was under the delusion that the body is
itself the self, and dominated by that delusion, had retreated from
battle. He was therefore taught the knowledge called 'Sankhya' or the
understanding of the self, and Yoga or what is called the path of
practical work without attachment. These together have as their
objective the attainment of steady wisdom (Sthitaprajnata) This has been
explained in the following verse by Sri Yamunacarya: Sankhya and Yoga,
which comprehend within their scope the understanding of the eternal
self and the practical way of disinterested action respectively, were
imparted in order to remove Arjuna's delusion. Through them the state of
firm wisdom can be reached.
