+++
title = "07 नियतस्य तु"

+++
18.7 Obligatory acts consist of daily, and occasional ceremonies like
the five great sacrifices; their abandonment is not proper, for without
actions even the sustenance of the body would be impossible, as already
stated: 'From no-work, not even the body can be sustained' (3.8). The
sustenance of the body by eating the sacrificial remnants produces
perfect knowledge. Otherwise, as declared in the statement, 'But the
sinful ones eat sin' (3.13). The satisfaction that comes by eating food
which is not the remnant of sacrifice and which is therefore of the form
of sin, is productive of erroneous knowledge in the mind. For, as
declared in the Sruti, 'The mind consists of food' (Cha. U., 6.5.4), the
mind is sustained by food. Also, there is the Sruti text, 'When the food
is pure, the mind becomes pure; when the mind is pure, remembrance
becomes firmly fixed; and when remembrance is acired, there is release
from all knots of the heart' (Ibid., 7.26.2). It is therefore proved by
the Sruti that knowledge of the form of direct perception of Brahman, is
dependent on the purity of food. Hence the great sacrifices and such
other obligatory and occasional rites are worthy of adoption till one's
death, as they help in the knowledge of the Brahman. The renunciation of
these is therefore not proper. Thus, the relinishment of these acts
which produce knowledge through the delusion that they bind the self, is
rooted in Tamas. Tamasika renunciation has its roots in Tamas. Since
such renunciation has its roots in ignorance which is the effect of
Tamas, such renunciation is said to have its roots in Tamas. For Tamas
is the root of ignorance as has been stated: 'From Tamas arise
negligence and delusion, and also, ignorance' (14.17). Ignorance is
erroneous knowledge which is antagonistic to right knowledge. So, it
will be taught, 'That reason which, enveloped in Tamas, regards wrong as
right, and which reverses every value, O Arjuna, is Tamasika' (18.32).
It is for this reason that the renunciation of obligatory and occasional
actions are said to have their roots in erroneous knowledge.
