+++
title = "11 न हि"

+++
18.11 It is impossible for one who has a body and has to nourish it. 'to
abandon action entirely'; for eating, drinking etc., reired for
nourshing the body and other acts connected therewith are unavoidable.
And for the same reason the five great sacrifices etc., are also
indispensable. He who has given up the fruits of the five great
sacrifices, is said to have renounced; this is referred to in the Srutis
such as: 'Only through renunciation do some obtain immortality' (Ma.
Na., 8.14). Renunciation of fruits of actions is illustrative; it
implies much more. It implies one who has renounced the fruits, agency
and attachment to works, as the topic has been begun with the
declaration: 'For abandonment (Tyaga) is declard to be of three kinds'
(18.4). This statement may be estioned in the following manner:
'Agnihotra, the full moon and new moon sacrifices, Jyotistoma etc., and
also the five great sacrifices are enjoined by the Sastras only for the
attainment of their results like heaven. They are not purposeless. Even
the injunction with regard to obligatory and occasional ceremonies is
enjoined because they yield results, as implied in the following
passage: "For householders, Prajapatya ceremony" (V.P., 1.6.37).
Therefore, as the performance of actions has to be understood as a means
for attaining their respective results, the accruing of agreeable and
disagreeable results is inevitable, even though they are performed
without any desire for fruits, just as a seed sown must grow into a tree
and bear fruit. Hence, actions ought not to be performed by an aspirant
for release, because the results are incompatible with release. Sri
Krsna answers such objections:
