+++
title = "14 अधिष्ठानन् तथा"

+++
18.14 - 18.15 For all actions, performed through body, words or mind,
whether they be authorized by the Sastras or not, the causes are these
five. (1) The body, which is a conglomeration of the 'great elements,'
is known as the seat, since it is governed by the individual self. (2)
The agent is the individual self. That this individual self is the
knower and the agent is established in the Vedanta-Sutras: 'For this
reason, (the individual self) is the knower' (2.3.18) and 'The agent, on
account of the scripture having a purport' (2.3.33.). (3) The organs of
various kinds are the five motor organs like that of speech, hands, feet
etc., along with the mind. They are of various kinds, viz., they have
different functions in completing an action. (4) The different and
distinctive functions of vital air - here the expression 'functions'
(Cesta) means several functions. Distinctive are the functions of this
fivefold vital air which sustains the body and senses through its
divisions of Prana, Apana etc. (5) Divinity is the fifth among these
causes. The purport is this: Among these, which constitute the
conglomeration of causes of work the Divinity is the fifth. It is the
Supreme Self, the Inner Ruler, who is the main cause in completing the
action. It has been already affirmed: 'I am seated in the hearts of all.
From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also' (15.15), and He
will say further: 'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives in the heart of every being
casuing them to spin round and round by His power as if set on a wheel'
(18.61). The agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme
Self as established in the aphorism: 'But from the Supreme, because the
scripture says so' (B. S., 2.3.41). Now an objection may be raised in
this way: If the agency of the individual self is dependent on the
Supreme Self and the individual self cannot be charged with moral
responsibility, then the scriptures containing injunctions and
prohibitions become useless, as the individual self cannot be enjoined
to act in regard to any action. The objection is disposed off by the
author of the Vedanta-Sutras in the aphorism: 'But with a view to the
effects made on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and
prohibitions' (2.3.42). The purport is this: By means of his senses,
body etc., granted by the Supreme Self - having Him for their support,
empowered by Him, and thus deriving power from Him - the individual self
begins, of his own free will, the effort for directing the senses etc.,
for the purpose of performing actions conditioned by his body and
organs. The individual self Itself, of Its own free will, is responsible
for activity, since the Supreme Self, abiding within, causes It to act
only by granting His permission, just as works such as moving heavy
stones and timber are collectively the labour of many persons and they
are together responsible for the effect. But each one of them
(severally) also is responsible for it. In the same way each individual
is answerable to Nature's law in the form of positive and negative
;ndments.
