+++
title = "42 शमो दमस्तपः"

+++
18.42 'Sama' is the control of the external sense-organs. 'Dama' is the
control of the mind. 'Tapas' is the chastisement of the body by
controlling enjoyments, as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Sauca' is fitness
for performing acts as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Ksanti' is preserving
the composure of the mind, though injured by others. 'Arjava' is
straightforwardness expressing itself in correct outward manifestation
to others in consonance with one's own mind. 'Jnana' is knowledge about
the real nature of the higher and lower truths. 'Vijnana' is the
knowledge pertaining to exceptional attributes belonging to the Supreme
Reality. 'Astikya' or faith is firm conviction in the truth of all
things enjoined in the Vedas. The meaning is that it is unshakable by
any reason whatever. 'Astikya' is positive conviction in the truth to
the following effect: (1) The Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Person, is
signified by the term, Supreme Brahman. (2) He is devoid of even the
slightest trace or evil. (3) He possesses countless hosts of auspicious
and excellent attributes such as knowledge, strength etc., boundless and
natural. (4) To reveal His nature is the sole purpose of the whole of
Vedas and the Vedanta and He can be known only through them. (5) He is
the sole cause of the universe (6) He is the foundation of the entire
universe. (7) He is the actuator of all. (8) All actions taught in the
Vedas form His worship. (9) When worshipped through them, He confers
fruits known as Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa. That such is the meaning
has been declared in the following text: 'Indeed I am to be known from
all the Vedas' (15.15); 'I am the origin of all; from Me proced
everything' (10.8), 'All this is strung on Me' (7.7), 'Knowing me as the
enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities ৷৷. he attains peace' (10.29),
There is nothing greater than myself, Arjuna (7.7) 'He from whom
proceeds the activity of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded -
by worshipping Him with his duty, will a man reach perfection' (18.46);
and 'He who knows Me as unborn, without a beginning and the great Lord
of the worlds ৷৷.' (10.3) Such are the duties of the Brahmana arising
from his inherent nature.
