+++
title = "44 कृषिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं"

+++
18.44 'Agriculture' is cultivation to produce crops. The meaning of
'cattle breeding' is the protection and rearing of cattle. 'Trade' is
the activity causing the amassing of wealth through buying and selling.
This is the duty of Vaisya born of his inherent nature. The duty of a
Sudra, born of his inherent nature, is service to the three Orders
mentioned earlier. All these have been described to stress that the
occupational activities of the four stations are auxiliary to the
performance of sacrifices etc., which are ordained by the Sastra.
Sacrifices etc., are common to the first three stations. Control of the
senses etc., are common to those who, among the first three stations,
are anxious for release. As a Brahmana possesses preponderance of
Sattva, and as the control of the senses, mind etc., can be performed by
him easily and naturally, control of the senses etc., have been
prescribed as his duty. As control of the mind, senses etc., can be
performed only with difficulty by the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas owing to
the preponderance of Rajas and Tamas respectively in them, these have
not been stated as their duty. The occupation of a Brahmana is
officiating as priest in sacrifices, teaching the Vedas and receiving
gifts. The occupation of a Ksatriya is protecting the people and that of
the Vaisyas is farming etc., as mentioned before. The duty and
occupation of the Sudra is service to the three stations.
