+++
title = "53 अहङ्कारम् बलम्"

+++
18.51 - 18.53 'Endowed with a purified understanding' means endowed with
the Buddhi capable of understanding the self as it is in reality;
'subduing the mind by steadiness' means making the mind fit for
meditation by turning away from external and internal objects;
'relinishing sound and other objects of senses' means keeping them far
away, casting aside love and hate occasioned by them (i.e., the sense
objects). 'Resorting to solitude' means living in a lonely place free
from hindrances to meditation; 'eat but little' means eating neither too
much nor too little; 'restraining speech, body and mind' means directing
the operations of body, speech and mind to meditation; 'ever engaged in
the Yoga of meditation' means being like this, i.e., constantly engaged
in the Yoga of meditation day after day until death; 'taking refuge in
dispassion' means developing aversion to all objects except the one
entity to be meditated upon, by considering the imperfections of all
objects and thus cultivating detachment to everything. Forsaking
'egoism' means abandoning the tendency to consider what is other than
the self, as well as neutralising the power of forcible Vasnas
(tendencies) which nourish (egoism), and the resulting pride, desire,
wrath and possessiveness. 'With no feeling of mine' means free from the
notion that what does not belong to oneself belongs to oneself; 'Who is
tranil' means, who finds sole happiness in experiencing the self. One
who has become like this and performs the Yoga of meditation becomes
worthy for the state of Brahman. The meaning is that, freed from all
bonds, he experiences the self as It really is.
