+++
title = "65 मन्मना भव"

+++
18.65 What is enjoined in Vedanta texts such as 'I know the Great Person
of the radiance of the sun, who is beyond this Prakrti. Knowing Him
thus, one becomes here immortal; there is no path for immortality' (Sve.
U., 3.8); what is designated by words such as knowledge (Vedanta),
meditation (Dhyana) and worship (Upasana); what is of the form of direct
perception (Darsana) having the character of continuous succession of
memory of a surpassingly loving nature to the worshipped - it is this
that is enjoined herein by the words 'Focus your mind on Me,' 'Be My
devotee.' It means, be one to whom I am incomparably dear. Since I am
the object of superabundant love, meditate on Me, i.e., practise the
succession of memory of unsurpassed love of Me. Such is the meaning. Be
My worshipper (yaji). Here also the expression, 'Be My devotee' is
applicable. Yajna is worship. Worship Me as one exceedingly dear to you.
Worship (Aradhana) is complete subservience to the Lord. Prostrate
before Me. Prostration means bowing down. The meaning is: Bow down
humbly before Me with great love. Renouncing thus all ego-centredness,
you shall come to Me. I make this solemn promise to you. Do not take it
as a mere flattery. For you are dear to Me. It has been already stated,
'For I am inexpressibly dear to the man of knowledge and dear is he to
Me' (7.17). He in whom there is surpassing love for Me, I hold him also
as surpassingly dear to Me. Conseently, not being able to bear
separation from him, I myself will enable him to attain Me. It is this
truth alone that has been solemnly declared to you in the expression
that 'you shall come to Me alone.'
