+++
title = "73 नष्टो मोहः"

+++
18.73 Arjuna said 'Delusion' or misapprehension is perverted knowledge.
By Your grace it has been destroyed. 'Smrti' or memory is the knowledge
of things as they really are. I have acired that. Misapprehension here
is the misconception that the self is the Prakrti (body-mind) which is
the non-self in reality. It consists in one not apprehending that all
intelligent and non-intelligent entities, by reason of their forming the
body of the Supreme Being, have Him as their Atman and are thus ensouled
by Him. The misapprehension also consists in the lack of knowledge that
actions, obligatory and occasional, do not cause bondage but actually
form a means for the propitiation of the Supreme Being. All such
misapprehensions are now destroyed. The various phases of knowledge that
cleared the misunderstanding may be catalogued as follows: (1) The self
is different from Prakrti and is therefore devoid of the alities of
Prakrti. Its nature is that of the knower of Prakrti. (2) The self is a
Sesa (sub-ordinate and servant) of the Supreme Person and is ruled by
Him. The true knowledge about the Supreme Person is that He is what is
signified by the expression Supreme Brahman. (3) He is the great ocean
of all auspicious, excellent attributes such as knowledge, strength,
glory, valour, power, brilliance etc., which are unbounded and natural.
His essence consists solely of auspiciousness. He is antagonistic to all
that is evil without exception. The origin, sustentation and dissolution
of the entire universe are His sport. (4) You (Sri Krsna) are Vasudeva,
the Supreme Person, known from the Vedanta, and who can be reached only
by worship, which has taken the form of Bhakti. (5) Bhakti can be
achieved by the control of the senses and the mind, the abandonment of
prohibited acts and the performance of occasional and obligatory acts as
solely intended for the goal of the satisfaction of the Supreme Person.
Bhakti has to be developed day after day through the regular practice of
the discriminatory knowledge of the higher and lower truths. All this
has been attained by me (Arjuna). Therefore I stand steadfast, freed
from the doubts and devoid of the depression rooted in perverted
knowledge nourished by compassion and love for relatives. Now I shall
fulfil Your words, concerned with fighting etc., which ought to be done
by me. I shall fight as instructed by You. Such is the meaning. Sanjaya
now relates to Dhrtarastra who had estioned him earlier as to what his
sons and the Pandavas were doing in the battle:
