+++
title = "063 अहिंसा सत्यम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Abstention from injuring, truthfulness, abstention from unlawful appropriation, purity and control of the sense-organs,—this Manu has declared to be the sum and substance of duty for the four castes.—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शौचं** मृज्जलादिबाह्यगतम् । **सामासिकं** समस्तस्य सर्वमुष्यभेदजातेर् उक्तम्, न ब्राह्मणादिजतिविभागेन । व्याख्यातम् अन्यत् । यद्य् अहिंसा प्रतिलोमानां धर्मः स्यात्, कथं तर्हि तद् उक्तम्- "मत्स्यघातो निषादानाम्" (म्ध् १०.४८), "बिलौको वधबन्धनम्" (म्ध् १०.४९), क्षत्रादीनाम् "अरण्यपशुहिंसनम्" (म्ध् १०.४८) एवं च[^१४१] 


[^१४१]:
     M G J: eva ca (taking this as part of the previous citation)

<u>केचिद्</u> आहुः- ये जीविकाहेतुतया वध्यत्वेनोक्तास् ततो ऽन्यत्राहिंसा । <u>अन्ये</u> मन्यन्ते- अहिंसा तेषाम् अभ्युदयसाधनहेतुत्वेन धर्मः, न तु प्रतिषेधो हिंसायाः संमत इति । यथा "न मांसभक्षणे दोषः" (म्ध् ५.५६) इतिवत् । यद्य् अहिंसा धर्मस् तेषाम्, कथं तर्हि तैर् जीवितव्यम् । यथा कुतश्चिद् अवगमात्[^१४२] तेषाम् अनुपपन्ना<sup> </sup>[^१४३] हिंसानिवृत्तिर्[^१४४] धर्मायेति चेत्, तदा को जीवनोपायः । अन्याश् च वृत्तयः प्रतिवर्णनियताः । अध्यापनादयस् तावद् अत्यन्तासंभवाद् अप्राप्ताः । कृष्यादयो ऽपि वैश्यनियताः । शूद्रस्य सेवा, अन्या वा साधारणी वृत्तिर् अस्ति । यथा वर्तेरन् "विद्या शिल्पम्" (म्ध् १०.११६) इत्य् अत्र दर्शयिष्यामः । यद् अपीदम् उच्यते "ते निन्दितैर् वर्तेयुर् द्विजानाम् एव कर्मभिः" इति तत्र किम् अस्ति निन्दिततरम् अन्यद् अतो हिंसायाः । न च मत्स्यघातो द्विजानाम् उपयुज्यते । श्राद्धे ऽतिथिभोजनादौ च कदाचित्क उपयोगः, न सार्वकालिको जीविकाभावः । तस्मान् न घातादि स्वतन्त्रम् ॥ १०.६३ ॥


[^१४४]:
     M G add: no


[^१४३]:
     M G: utpannaḥ; I follow J and DK (5: 1747). I suggest the following emendation: yathākutaścid avagamāt teṣām anupapannāhiṃsā


[^१४२]:
     M G: avagamas
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Purity*’—refers to external purity, brought about by the use of clay,
water and such things.

‘*Sum, and substance*.’—This means that this is what pertains to entire
human community, and not only to the Brāhmaṇa and the other castes.

The rest has been already explained.

“If ‘abstention from injuring creatures’ is the duty of the mixed castes
of the ‘inverse’ order, how is it that it has been declared
that—‘killing fish is the livelihood of the Niṣādas’ (48), ‘and the
catching of animals,’ living underground’ (49), and ‘the killing of wild
animals for the *Kṣattṛ* and others?’”

In answer to this some people offer the explanation that the ‘abstention
from injuring’ refers to injury other than that which has been
prescribed as one’s livelihood.

Others think that what is here meant is that ‘abstention from injury’ is
that kind of duty which is the source of spiritual welfare, and it does
not mean the absolute prohibition of all injury. Just As it is in the
case of the assertion—‘there is no harm in the eating of meat etc.,
etc.’

“If ‘abstention from injury’ is *a duty*, how are the men to subsist?
Other sources of income being not available to them, and abstention from
injury being regarded sis conducive to spiritual welfare, what would be
their means of livelihood? Specially as all other professions have been
restricted to each distinct caste. For instance, teaching and other
similar professions; are absolutely impossible, and cannot be available;
agriculture and cognate professions are restricted to *Vaiśyas*; and
service is the exclusive duty of the Śūdra.”

How these men are to subsist we shall explain below, under 116. It is
further stated (in 46) that ‘they shall subsist by doing undespised
manual labour for the twice-born people’; and what could be more
‘despised’ than *injuring living beings*? As for the ‘killing of fish,’
this could be of no use to twice-born men? It is true that an occasional
use for it has been spoken of in connection with *Śrāddhas* and the
reception of guests; but that could not serve as a permanent means of
livelihood.

From all this it follows that no one is free to do any killing or
injuring of living beings.—(63)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (1.122).—‘Abstention from injury, Truthfulness, Abstention
from theft, Purity, Control of the senses, Liberality, Self-control,
Mercy, Tolerance,—these are the means of righteousness for all men.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 164).—‘Freedom from cruelty, Abstention from
injury, Kindness, Liberality, Performance of Śrāddha, Honouring guests,
Truthfulness, Freedom from anger, Contentment with one’s own wife,
Purity, Freedom from envy, Self-knowledge and Patience are the common
virtues...... Truth, Self-control, Austerity, Purity, Contentment,
Shyness, Tolerance, Straightforwardness, Wisdom, Calmness, Mercy,
Concentrated mind—these constitute the eternal Dharma.—That is *Truth*
which is beneficial to living beings; *Self-Control* consists in
controlling the mind; *Austerity* consists in remaining firm in one’s
own duty; *Purity* consists in the evading of inter-mixtures;
*Contentment* consists in giving up objects of sense; *Shyness* consists
in desisting from evil deeds; *Tolerance* consists in the capacity to
bear the pairs of opposites; *Straightforwardness* consists in balance
of mind; *Wisdom* consists in discerning the true nature of things;
*Calmness* consists in peacefulness of mind; *Mercy* consists in the
inclination to do good to living beings;—this is eternal Dharma.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘Mercy, Tolerance, Freedom from envy, Purity,
Abstention from over-exertion, Propitiousness, Freedom from miserliness,
Freedom from desires,—these are common to all men.—When one protects
another person in times of trouble,—whether he be a stranger or a
relation, an enemy or a friend,—this is what is meant by *Mercy*.
*Tolerance* is that by virtue of which one does not become angry on
suffering pain. When one does not feel unhappy at the good qualities of
another, and eulogises even those whose qualities are not of the
best;—this is called *Freedom from envy*. *Purity* consists in avoiding
forbidden food and in associating with blameless persons. When one
avoids those acts which, though good, bring suffering to the body, that
is *Abstention from over-exertion*. *Propitiousness* consists in doing
what is good and desisting from what is not commended. *Freedom from
Miserliness* is that by virtue of which one gives away, without pain,
even the little that he possesses. *Freedom from Desires* is that by
which one remains contented with whatever he obtains, without thinking
of what others have got.’

*Gautama* (8.22-23).—‘Now follow the eight qualities of the
soul—Compassion on all creatures, Forbearance, Freedom from anger,
Purity, Quietism, Propitiousness, Freedom from avarice and Freedom from
covetousness.’

*Āpastamba* (1.23-6).—‘Freedom from anger, from exultation, from
grumbling, from covetousness, from perplexity, from hypocrisy and
hurtfulness,—Truthfulness, Moderation in eating, Silencing slander,
Freedom from envy, Self-denying, Liberality, Avoiding of gifts,
Uprightness, Affability, Extinction of the passions, Subjugation of the
senses, Peace with all beings, Concentration of mind, Regulation of
conduct according to the Āryas, Peacefulness and Contentment;—these good
qualities have been settled by the agreement of the wise for all the
four orders. He who, according to the precepts of the sacred Law,
practises these, enters the Universal Self.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.16-17).—‘Forbearance, Veracity, Restraint, Purity,
Liberality, Self-control, Avoiding the killing of animals, Obedience to
elders, Pilgrimage, Sympathy with the afflicted,—Straightforwardness,
Freedom from covetousness, Reverence towards God and Brāhmaṇas, and
Freedom from anger are duties common to all.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च प्रकरणसामर्थाच् चातुर्वर्णान्तरप्रभावानाम् अप्य् अहिंसादिपुरुषधर्मो विज्ञेयः । एवं चायं शनकैः सिद्धिहेतुर् एषाम् । पूर्वस् तु सामर्थ्यात् सद्य एव इति विज्ञायते, पूर्वस्माद् ब्राह्मणादिवर्णलक्षणशस्त्रात् "सर्ववर्णेषु तुल्यासु" इत्य् एवमादेः । अन्यथा ब्राह्मणत्वादीन्य् अप्राप्तानि । इष्यन्ते च तान्य् उत्कर्षापकार्षाभ्याम् अपि । यत इदम् आरभ्य[ते] ॥ १०.६३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

063	Abstention from injuring (creatures), veracity, abstention from unlawfully appropriating (the goods of others), purity, and control of the organs, Manu has declared to be the summary of the law for the four castes.
</details>
