+++
title = "085 इदन् तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But there is this, that one who, under the stress of livelihood, renounces the strictness concerning his duties, may, for increasing his wealth, sell such commodities as are sold by Vaiśyas, with certain exceptions.—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**इदम्** इति वक्ष्यमाणस्य प्रतिनिर्देशः । विशः पण्यं **विट्पण्यं** वैश्यानां यद्विक्रेयं तद् अपि वृत्तिवैकल्याद्[^१७२] धनाभावाद्[^१७३] ब्राह्मणेन विक्रेयम् । उद्धार्याणि द्रव्याण्य् **उद्धार**शब्देनोच्यन्ते । **उद्धृत उद्धारो** यस्मिन् तद् एवम् उच्यते । वक्ष्यमाणानि द्रव्याण्य् अत उद्धृत्यान्यानि विक्रेयाणि । **वित्तवर्धनम्** इति स्वभावानुवाधः[^१७४] । वाणिज्यायां हि धनवृद्धिः प्रसिद्धा । **त्यजतो धर्मनैपुणं** धर्मे या निष्ठा । अतस् तेन पण्यविक्रयो न कर्तव्य इति ज्ञापयति । अतश् चेदम् अवगम्यते- सर्वासां वैश्यवृत्तीनां गर्हिता कृषिः, ततो न्यूना वाणिज्या,[^१७५] ततो गोरक्षादयः[^१७६] ॥ १०.८५ ॥


[^१७६]:
     M G: gorakṣādayaḥ


[^१७५]:
     M G omit: tato nyūnā vāṇijyā


[^१७४]:
     M G: bhāvānuvādhaḥ


[^१७३]:
     M G: dhānābhāvād


[^१७२]:
     DK suggests: vitta for vṛtti
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*This*’—refers to what follows.

‘*Such commodities as are sold by Vaiśyas*.’—If the Brāhmaṇa has no
wealth, he may, if pressed for livelihood, sell such things as are
permitted to be sold by Vaiśyas.

‘*Exceptions*.’—This term stands for the commodities excluded. ‘*With
certain exceptions*’;—from which certain articles are excluded. The
Brāhmaṇa may sell the things, with the exception of those hereinafter
enumerated.

‘*For increasing his wealth*.’—This describes the nature of things; it
being well known that trade is conducive to increased wealth.

‘*Renounces the strictness concerning his duties*,’—*i.e*., his strict
regard for his duty. This implies that as a rule the said selling should
not be done; and the upshot of all this is that from out of the several
occupations of the Vaiśya, Agriculture is the worst for the Brāhmaṇa,
then trade, and then cattletending and the rest—(85)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 10.85-93)  
**

*Gautama* (7.8-15).—‘Goods not to be sold by the Brāhmaṇa are—perfumes,
flavouring substances, prepared food, sesamum, hempen and linen cloth,
skins, garments dyed red or washed, milk and preparations of it, roots,
fruits, flowers, medicines, honey, flesh, grass, water, poisons, animals
for slaughter; nor under any circumstances, human beings, heifers,
female calves, cows big with young. Some declare that traffic in land,
rice, barley, goats, sheep, horses, hulls, milch cows and draught oxen
is also forbidden.’

*Āpastamba* (1.20.10-13).—‘Trade is not lawful for a Brāhmaṇa;—in times
of distress he may trade in lawful merchandise, avoiding the following,
that are forbidden—men, condiments and liquids, colours, perfumes, food,
skins, heifers, glueing substances, water, young corn-stalks, substances
from which spirituous liquor is extracted, red and black pepper, corn,
flesh, arms, and the hope of reward for meritorious deeds. Among the
various kinds of grains, he shall specially not sell sesamum or rice.

*Yājñavalkya* (3.6-38).—‘Fruits, stones, linen, Soma, human beings,
cakes, plants, sesamum, rice, liquids, curds, milk, clarified butter,
water, arms, wine, wax, honey, lac, grass, clay, skins, flowers,
blankets, hairs, *Takra*, poisons, land, silken cloth, indigo, salt,
one-hoofed animals, lead, vegetable, pepper, medicines, oil-cake,
animals, perfumes,—these the Brāhmaṇa should never sell, even when
living by the occupations of the Vaiśya. But sesamum may be sold for
religious purposes, in exchange of paddy.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.27-29).—‘He who sells sesamum, forsooth, sells his
ancestors; he who sells rice, forsooth, sells his life; he who gives
away his daughter, making a bargain, forsooth, sells portions of his
spiritual merit. Grass and wood in their natural state may be sold. They
quote the following—“Animals that have only one row of teeth, as well as
minerals excepting salt, and undyed thread,—these, O Brāhmaṇa, are the
goods thou art permitted to sell.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.24-31).—‘A Brāhmaṇa and a Kṣatriya, who have resorted to a
Vaiśya’s mode of living and maintain themselves by trade, shall not sell
stones, salt, hempen cloth, silk, linen and skins; nor any kind of dyed
clothing; nor prepared food, flowers, fruit, roots, perfumes, substances
(used for) flavouring (food); nor water, the juice extracted from
plants; nor Soma, weapons, poison, nor flesh, nor milk, nor preparations
of it, iron, tin, lac, and lead. Now they quote also (the following
verse): By (selling) flesh, lac, and salt a Brāhmaṇa at once becomes an
outcast; by selling milk he becomes (equal to) a Śūdra after three days.
Among tame animals those with uncloven hoofs, and those that have an
abundance of hair (must not be sold), nor any wild animals, (nor) birds,
nor beasts that have tusks (or fangs). Among the various kinds of grain
they mention sesamum (as forbidden). Now they quote also (the following
verse)—If he applies sesamum to any other purpose but food, anointing
and charitable gifts, he will be born again as a worm and, together with
his ancestors, be plunged into his own ordure.—Or, at pleasure, they may
sell (sesamum), if they themselves have produced it by tillage.’

*Viṣṇu* (54.18-21).—‘He who sells fresh ginger, edible plants, perfumes,
flowers, fruits, roots, skins, canes, things made of split bamboo,
chaff, potsherds, hair, ashes, bone, cow-milk or curds, oil-cakes,
sesamum or oil, must perform the *Prājāpatya*. He who sells the fruit of
the *śleśmātaka* tree, lac, bees-wax, shells, mother-o-pearl, tin, lead,
iron, copper, or sacrificial vessels made of rhinoceros’ horn, must
perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*. He who sells dyed cloth, tin, precious stones,
perfumes, sugar, honey, liquids or condiments, or wool must fast for
three days. He who sells meat, salt, lac or milk must perform the
*Cāndrāyaṇa*. And all these persons should undergo initiation a second
time.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**धर्मनैपुण**त्यागवचनाद् अस्यापि हीनता गम्यते गोरक्ष्यात् । एवं च सति क्ट्षेर् वानिज्यम् उत्कृष्टम् । तथापि गोरक्ष्यं ज्याय इत्य् एतत् सामर्थ्याद् गम्यते । सो ऽयम् अधुना विट्पण्योद्धार उच्यते विक्रीणानस्य पण्यम् ॥ १०.८५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

085	But he who, through a want of means of subsistence, gives up the strictness with respect to his duties, may sell, in order to increase his wealth, the commodities sold by Vaisyas, making (however) the (following) exceptions.
</details>
