+++
title = "002 न वै"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who is seeking for progeny, he who is going to perform a sacrifice, a traveller on the road, he who has given away all his belongings, he who is begging for his preceptor, he who is begging for his parents, he who is begging for study, a sick man;—(1)—these nine Brāhmaṇas, who are religious mendicants, one should know as ‘Snātakas’; to these penniless men gifts shall be given, in proportion to their learning.—(2)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

श्लोकद्वयेन च वाक्यार्थसमाप्तिः । अनेकविशेषणविशिष्टो दानार्थी[^१] विधीयते । **सान्तानिक्**आदिभ्यो धर्मार्थं भिक्ष्यमाणेभ्यो निःस्वेभ्यो **विद्याविशेषेण दातव्यम्** इति । संप्रति संप्रदानविशेषणत्वे धर्मभिक्षुकशब्दस्याधिकारसंपादनम् अपि प्रतीयते । एवं नैव विशिष्टायाश् चैव निमित्तम् इति नैमित्तिको दानाधिकारश् चोच्यते । 


[^१]:
     M G: snātakaviśeṣeṇa viśiṣṭo dānārtho

- संतानं प्रजा प्रयोजनम् अस्येति **सान्तानिको** विवाहार्थी भण्यते । तत्र हि धनम् उपयुज्यते । भवति च पारंपर्येण संतानप्रयोजनः । धर्मग्रहणात् "कामतस् तु प्रवृत्तानाम्" (म्ध् ३.१२) इति द्वितीयादिविवाहप्रवृत्तौ न नियमतो देयम् इति । एवं **यक्ष्यमाणो**[^२] नित्ययज्ञाग्निष्टोमाद्यर्थं वृत्तिवचनं यः करोति स वेदितव्यः । **अध्वगः** क्षीणपथ्योदनः । **सार्ववेदसो** विश्वजिति सर्वस्वं दक्षिणात्वेन दत्तवान्, न तु प्रायश्चित्ताद्यर्थम् । **स्वाध्यायार्थी** । यद्य् अपि ब्रह्मचारिणो ऽध्ययनं विहितं भिक्षाभोजनं च, तथापि वस्त्रार्थोपयोगि धनं दातव्यम् । अथ वा गृहीतवेदस्य तदर्थजिज्ञासा भैक्षभुजो ऽपि । **उपतापी** रोगी । **स्नातक**ग्रहणं प्रशंसार्थम् । **गुर्वर्थं **स्वाध्यायार्थत्वं प्रायः स्नातकविषये विद्यते । ब्रह्मचारिणो गुर्वर्थं कर्तव्यम् इति विहितम् । **निःस्वेभ्यो** निर्धनेभ्यः[^३] । **विद्याविशेषतो** बहुविद्याय बहु स्वल्पविद्यायाल्पम् इति । 


[^३]:
     M G: niścitya nirvacanebhyo


[^२]:
     M G: vakṣyamāṇo

- <u>ननु</u> च सर्वम् एवेदम् अप्रकृतं प्रक्रियते । एवं हि प्रतिज्ञातम्- "अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रायश्चित्तविधिं शुभम्" (म्ध् १०.१३१) इति ।

- <u>नैष दोषः</u>, आश्रमधर्मत्वाद् अस्य प्रकरणस्य । प्रायश्चित्तानाम् अतुल्यरूपतया सहोपदेशस् तत्र प्रायश्चित्तनिमित्तत्वाद् अस्यार्थस्य प्रथमम् अभिधानम् ।

- **दानं देयम्** इत्य् उक्तम् । **दान**शब्दश् च कर्मसाधनः । किं तद् देयम् इत्य् अपेक्षायाम् उत्तरश्लोकः ॥ ११.१–२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 11.1-2)**

The two verses together form one sentence; which lays down the several
characteristics of the person seeking for gifts; the sense being that
gifts shall be given, in proportion to their learning, to such penniless
men as, having the said character of ‘seeking for progeny’ and the rest,
may be seeking for gifts.

The term ‘*religious mendicant*,’ while qualifying the recipient of
gifts, serves also as a condition that entitles the man to receive
gifts. Thus it is that by laying down the character of the man fit for
receiving gifts, the Author also indicates the occasions on which gifts
may be given.

‘*One seeking for progeny*,’—h e who intends to marry for the purpose of
obtaining children. It is for the marriage that money is required; and
it helps in the obtaining of children indirectly. Inasmuch as the text
has added the epithet ‘religious,’ one need not give gifts to one who is
going to marry a second time, only through lust.

Similarly, ‘*one who is going to perform, a sacrifice*’ is to be
understood as referring to one who is seeking for wealth in order to
enable him to perform the *Agnihotra* and other compulsory rites.

The ‘*traveller on the road*,’—the person whose supply has run short
during his journey.

‘*Who has given away all his belongings*’;—*i.e*., the man who has given
away his entire property, as the sacrificial fee for the Viśvajit
sacrifice,—and not by way of an expiatory rite.

‘*He who is begging for study*’;—though for the *Religious Student*, all
that is laid down is ‘Vedic Study’ and ‘living on alms,’—yet enough
should be given to him to provide for his clothing. Or, even one who has
learnt the Veda may be seeking for the knowledge of what is contained in
the Veda, though he may be living on alms.

‘*Sick man*’—one suffering from a disease.

The name ‘*Snātaka*’ has been mentioned here only with a view to
eulogising the men spoken of. And the reason for applying this name lies
in the fact that as a rule ‘begging for the preceptor’ and ‘begging for
study’ are possible only for the *Snātaka*, the Accomplished Student;
though for the Religious Student also it has been laid down that he
shall do the begging for his preceptor.

‘*Penniless*’—destitute of wealth.

‘*In proportion to their learning*;’—*i.e*., much wealth shall be given
to one possessed of much learning, and little to one possessed of little
learning.

“All this that is stated here appears to be wholly irrelevant; as what
the Author has declared is—‘I am now going to expound the law relating
to Expiations’ (10.131).”

There is no force in this objection. In fact the whole context deals
with the duties of men in the various stages of life. The several
Expiatory Bites are of unequal nature, and hence these are mentioned
along with those. And what is stated in the opening verse has been
mentioned first, because it also indicates certain occasions for the
performance of expiatory rites.

It bus been said that ‘gifts shall be given’; and the act of ‘giving’
can be accomplished only through something that may be given; hence the
Author proceeds, in the next verso, to point, out what it is that should
be given.—(1-2)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 11.1-2)**

‘*Gurvartham*’.—‘For the purpose of maintaining his Teacher’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘in order to procure the fee
for his Teacher’ (Nārāyaṇa).

These verses are quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 468), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sāntānika*,’ ‘for the sake of
offspring’;—‘*Sarvavedasa*’, ‘one who has given away all his
belongings’;—‘*upatāpī*’, one who is ill;—this is meant to permit only
that much of wandering on the road and other deviations without which
alms cannot be obtained.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 77);—and in *Parā* *śaramādhava* (Ācāra
p. 429), which adds the following notes:—‘*Sāntānika*,’ one who seeks
wealth for the purpose of marrying with a view to obtaining
children;—‘*Sarvavedasa*,’ one who has been reduced to penury on having
performed the sacrifice at which all his belongings have been given away
as the sacrificial fee,—‘*pitṛmātrartham*’, one who seeks to serve his
parents,—‘*svādhyāyārthī*,’ who seeks wealth for the keeping up of the
teaching of the Veda,—‘*upotāpī*’, invalid;—the compound
‘*svādhyāyārthyupatāpi*’ is to be expounded as ‘the *upatāpi*, invalid,
as along with the *svādhyāyārthi*’, *i.e*., both of these.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha p. 354, and Dāna p. 30), which
explains ‘*sāntānikān*’ as ‘those who seek to marry for the purpose of
begetting offspring’,—‘*adhvaga*’ as ‘one who has started on a
pilgrimage’,—‘*sārvavedasa*,’ (which is its reading for ‘*sarvavedasa*’)
as ‘one who is performing sacrifice at which one’s entire property is
given away as the sacrificial fee,’—and ‘*upatāpi*’ as an ‘invalid.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.1-3)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.1-3).—‘One whose property has been stolen, one who
is going to perform a sacrifice, one who has read up to the end of all
the Vedas, one who is seeking wealth for his teacher, or for the
performance of rites to Pitṛs, or for the carrying on of Vedic
study,—such Brāhmaṇas have been regarded as righteous beggars. To such
poor men one should give gifts and also impart learning. In other cases
the sacrificial fee should be paid; and to others, cooked food may he
given outside the altar.’

*Gautama* (5.21-23).—‘Presents of money should be given, outside the
Vedi, to persons begging for their teachers, or in order to defray the
expenses of their wedding, or to procure medicine for the sick, to those
who are going to offer a sacrifice, to those engaged in study, to
travellers, and to those who have performed the Viśvajit sacrifice.
Prepared food should be given to other beggars.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.5.19-20).—‘Presents of money should be given, according
to one’s ability, to good Brāhmaṇas, *Śrotriyas*, and to those who have
gone to the end of the Vedas, when they beg outside the Vedi, for the
sake of their teachers, or for defraying the expenses of their marriage,
or of medicine, or when they are distressed for livelihood, or are
desirous of offering a sacrifice, or engaged in study, or on a journey,
or have performed the *Viśvajit* sacrifice. Cooked food should be given
to other beggars.’

*Āpastamba* (2.10.1-2).—‘The reasons for which begging is permissible
are—tho desire to collect the fee for the teacher, the celebration of
wedding, or of a *Śrauta* sacrifice, the desire to maintain one’s
parents and the impending interruption of ceremonies performed by a
worthy man. The person asked for alms must examine the qualities of the
petitioner and give according to his power.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र चोद्यते- यद् उक्तम् अनन्तरम् एव दशमाध्यायोपसंहारे "अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रायश्चित्तविधिं शुभम्" इति, नन्व् एतदपेक्षया प्रायश्चित्तप्रकरणम् एवोपन्यसनीयम् "अकुर्वन् विहितं कर्म" इत्यादि । इतरथाप्य् अप्रकृतोपन्यासः प्रकृतार्थव्यवधानं चायुक्तम् आपद्यते । यतः स्नातकधर्मापद्धर्मप्रकरणयोर् एवैतत् सर्वम् उपदेष्टव्यम्, नात्रेति । अत्रोच्यते- साहचर्याद् एवैतयोर् यथोक्तप्रकरणद्वये ऽप्य् अवकाशम् अलभमानयोर् इह विलेषनिर्देशो युक्तः, मा भूद् एतयोः परस्परसंबद्धयोर् अन्यत्रप्रकरणे ऽन्यस्य निर्देशे ऽधिक्रियमाणे प्रकरणभेदाद् असामञ्जस्यम् इति । निर्दिष्टारम्भप्रयोजनस्येदम् अधिना विवरणं स्लोकद्वयस्य । एकविद्यमानद्रव्यश् च न याचेत, **निःस्वेभ्यो देयम् एतेभ्य** इति वचनात् । दानं चात्र चोद्यते, न तु याचना । निमित्तसंनियोगेनार्थगृहीतत्वाद् अशासितव्या हि सा । तच् च दर्शयति **निःस्वेभ्यो** फलस्याविशेष उपदेशतुल्यत्वाद् इति, उभयस्माद् इत्य् आह नियमाद् देयविशेषाच् च । यदि देयविशेषात् फलविशेषो न स्यात्, न कश्चिद् दानविशेषे प्रयतेत शास्त्रव्यपक्षया । अथ वा नियमस्य दानाश्रितस्य चोदितत्वात्, नियमाच् च, धर्म यथाशक्तिनियमसाधनत्यागेन च देयविशेषे ऽवश्यंभावि । एवं च न देयविशेषात् फलविशेषः प्रत्याख्यातुं शक्य उपदेशतुल्यत्वे [ऽपि] । तथा चोक्तम् ।

> पात्रस्य हि विशेषेण श्रद्दधानतयैव च ।  
> अल्पं वा बहु वा प्रेत्य दानस्यावाप्यते फलम् ॥ इति ॥ ११.१–२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

002	These nine Brahmanas one should consider as Snatakas, begging in order to fulfil the sacred law; to such poor men gifts must be given in proportion to their learning.
</details>
