+++
title = "044 अकुर्वन् विहितम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man does not do what is enjoined, or does what is censured, or becomes addicted to sensual objects, he becomes liable to expiatory rites.—(44)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इदानीं प्रकृतान्य् एव प्रायश्चित्तानि कथ्यन्ते । प्रथमं तावत् तेष्व् अधिकारं निरूपयति । को ऽत्राधिकारः ।

- **विहितं** नित्यतया संध्योपासनाग्निहोत्रादि, "यावज्जीवम् अग्निहोत्रं जुहुयात्" इत्यादिभिः पदैर् ज्ञापितनित्यभावात्[^३७] । यद् अप्य् अनियतनिमित्ते ऽशुचिस्पर्शनादौ[^३८] स्नानादि तद्**विहितम्** । **अकुर्वन्** प्रमादालस्यादिना । तथा **निन्दितं** प्रतिषिद्धं सुरापानादि । तद् अपि शास्त्रम् अतिक्रम्य सेवमानः । **प्रायश्चित्तीयते** । तद् एतद् उक्तं भवति । नैमित्तिको ऽयम् अधिकारो विहिताकरणात् प्रतिषिद्धसेवनाच् च प्रायश्चित्तम् ।


[^३८]:
     M G: 'śuciḥ sparśanādau


[^३७]:
     M G: jñāpitaṃ nityabhāvāt

- <u>ननु</u> च ग्रामकामस्य सांग्रहणी विहिता । ततो ग्रामार्थिनः कथंचिद् अकरणे विहितातिक्रमः स्यात् । यदि नाम ग्रामार्थी प्रत्यवेयात् ततस् तत्कामो ऽस्य । यदा तु ग्रामं कामयते तदा तस्य तद्विहितं भवति । न चेत् प्रवर्तते विहितम् अतिक्रामेत् । अतश् च प्रायश्चित्ती[^३९] प्राप्तः ।


[^३९]:
     M G: prāyaścitte

- <u>उच्यते</u> । "ग्रामस्य स्वामी स्याम्" इति फललिप्सया तस्य यत्र प्रवृत्तिर् न विधिलक्षणा । शास्त्रं तु यागग्रामयोः साद्यसाधनसंबन्धावेदकम् एव । वस्तुतो यद्य् अपि तत्रापि कर्तव्यताप्रधानप्रसाधनो वाक्यार्थः, तथापि फलसिद्ध्यर्थम् एव कर्तव्यतां विधिर्[^४०] अवगमयति । अतश् च यागम्[^४१] कुर्वतः फलं न निष्पद्यते,[^४२] न पुनः प्रत्यवायः । यत्र प्रत्यवायस् तत्र च प्रायश्चित्तम् ।


[^४२]:
     M G: phalaṃ niṣidhyate


[^४१]:
     M G: nāvagamaṃ


[^४०]:
     M G: kartavyatāvidhir

- <u>ननु</u> च नित्यानाम् अकरणे प्रत्यवायो भवतीति कुत इयम् अवगतिः । न ह्य् एवम् अग्निहोत्रादौ श्रूयते- "यो न कुर्यत् स प्रत्यवेयात्" । 

- <u>श्रूयते</u> वाक्यशेषेषु "वेदिभ्यः परमा भवति" इति । सर्वत्रार्थवादाः प्रत्यवायप्रदर्शनार्थाः सन्ति । अवश्यं च तेषाम् आलम्बनं वाच्यं नान्यथा विधिनैकवाक्यतां भजन्ति । यत्रापि न श्रूयन्ते तत्रापि विध्यनुग्रहार्था अर्थवादाः प्रकल्प्यन्ते । किं चार्थवादैर् विधेर् एव प्रवर्तकत्वम्, अन्यथा नोपपद्यते यावद् अप्रवृत्तौ प्रत्यवायपरिहारो न कल्पितः । एवंविध एवार्थे वृद्धव्यवहारे विधिः प्रवर्तते । बाद्यते तु पुरुषप्रवर्तनारूढो ऽसौ । न च पुरुषा अपुरुषार्थे प्रवर्तयितुं शक्यन्ते । अतः प्रवर्तकत्वविहतविधिर् मा भूद् इति श्रुतिसिद्ध्यर्था कल्पनैषा । यद्य् अपि स्वर्गादिकल्पनायाम्[^४३] अपि तथार्थलाभस् तथापि यावज्जीवादिपदविरोधात् प्रयवायपरिहारार्थतापि स्यात् । उक्तम्-


[^४३]:
     M G: -kalpanānām

- भयाद् धि यादृशी पुंसां प्रवृत्तिर् उपजायते ।

- न तदृशी भवेद् अत्र विधिकोटिशतैर् अपि ॥ 

तस्माद् **अकुर्वन् विहितम्** इति नित्यं **कर्मेति** द्रष्टव्यम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाशुचिस्पर्शनदौ न नित्यावेदि किंचित् पदम् अस्ति, यावज्जीवम् इत्यादिवत् । 

- <u>किम्</u> अत्रान्येन पदेन निमित्तविशेषे यत्[^४४] श्रुतं तस्य च तन्निमित्तेन कर्तव्यता नाम प्रतीयते । नाधिकारान्तरं प्रत्यपेक्षाया जायते । यदा निमित्तसंविधानं तदा कर्तव्यम् इत्य् उपगमैर् नित्यतसिद्धिः । अग्निहोत्रादाव् अपि न नित्यशब्दो ऽस्ति निमित्तनित्यत्वात् । 


[^४४]:
     M G: nimittaṃ viśeṣayet

- **प्रसञ्जन्न्**[^४५] अविदितत्वेषु विषयेषु संस्कृतान्नभोजनचन्दनानुलेपनदिषु तात्पर्यत आसेवाप्रसङ्गो विषयाभिलाषपरतेति यावत् ।


[^४५]:
     M G: prasajjann

- <u>ननु</u> चैतद् अपि प्रतिषिद्धम् "इन्द्रियार्थेषु सर्वेषु[^४६] न प्रसज्येत कामतः" (म्ध् ४.१६) इति ।


[^४६]:
     M G: indriyaiḥ sukhalubdheṣu

- स्नातकव्रताधिकारान् नायं प्रतिषेध इति मन्यते । व्रतशब्दाधिकरे हि तत्र प्रतिषेधकः । संकल्पविशेषो हि मानसस् तत्रोपदिश्यते "इदं मया न कर्तव्यम्" इति । 

- अथ वा कश्चिद् अल्पप्रतिषेधे न तुल्यतां मन्येत, "पदार्थस् तावद् अयं न निषिध्यते" इति मन्यमानः, अतः समानीक्रियते । 

- अथ वा सामान्ये तद्भूतस्यापि विशेषस्य पृथग् उपदेशो दृष्टः, प्राधान्यख्यपनार्थम् । यथा "ब्राह्मणा आयाता," "वसिष्ठो ऽप्य् आयातः" इति । 

- **प्रायश्चित्तीयते** । प्रायश्चित्तशब्दो रूढिरूपेण विशिष्टे नैमित्त्के वर्तते । तदेतीच्छति वेति विनिमयः[^४७] (?) कर्तव्यः "व्यत्ययो बहुलम्" (पाण् ३.३.८५) इति । **नर** इति वचनं चातुर्वर्ण्याधिकारार्थम् ॥ ११.४४ ॥


[^४७]:
     M G omit: vinimayaḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The text now proceeds to describe those Expiatory Rites which form the
subject-matter of the discourse, and first of all it describes the
persons liable to the performance of these rites. What is it that makes
a man liable?

‘*What is enjoined*’—as a compulsory act, such as the Twilight Prayers,
the Agnihotra and so forth, all such as have their compulsory character
indicated by such words as ‘one shall perform the Agnihotra *throughout
life*.’ Those acts also that have been laid down as to be done under
specified circumstances,—such as bathing when one is defiled by the
touch of something unclean—are included among those ‘*enjoined*.’

‘*Does* *not do*’—through carelessness or laziness.

Similarly ‘*what is censured*’—forbidden, such as the drinking of wine
and so forth. If one, transgressing the Scriptures, has recourse to such
acts.

‘*Becomes liable to expiatory rites*.’—All this means that the liability
in this case is conditional; the performance of expiatory rites being
incumbent upon one who omits what is enjoined and does what is
forbidden.

“For one who is desirous of acquiring a village the *Sāṅgra* *haṇī*
sacrifice has been *enjoined*; so that if one who is desirous of
acquiring a village is somehow unable to perform that sacrifice, this
would be an *omission of what is enjoined* on his part; as soon as he
conceives a desire for the acquisition of a village, the said sacrifice
becomes for him an ‘enjoined act’; so that if he does not undertake it,
he transgresses the injunction and hence should be liable to the
expiatory rites.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What the injunction in such a
case means is that ‘when one undertakes the performance of the
particular sacrifice, he is led to it by a desire for the reward in the
shape of a village’; so that what the scriptural injunction really does
is to indicate the relation of cause and effect between the ‘sacrifice’
and the ‘acquisition of a village.’ Even though in this case also the
main idea expressed by the injunctive sentence is that the act in
question *should be done*, yet what the injunction actually does is to
lay down that the act should be done only for the accomplishment of the
said purpose. So that all that happens to the person omitting the
performance of that sacrifice is that that purpose is not accomplished;
such omission does not involve a sin; and an expiatory rite would be
necessary only when there has been some sin.

“Whence is the idea derived that the omission of a compulsory duty
involves sin? In connection with the Agnihotra and such other compulsory
acts, we do not find any such assertion as—‘he who does not do it incurs
sin.’”

As a matter of fact we do find sentences occurring in the wake of the
injunction of compulsory duties,—such as ‘*vedibh-yaḥ paramā bhavati*’
\[which are understood to be indicative of the said idea\]; and in
almost all cases there are declamatory passages indicative of the sin
involved in the omission of compulsory acts; and there must be some
truth in these; otherwise they could not be construed along with any
injunction. Even in cases where no such declamatory passages are
actually found, they are always assumed in support of injunctions. In
fact it is the declamatory passages that constitute the driving force
behind injunctions; such driving force would not be efficient unless it
were assumed that an omission would involve sin. In the actual practice
of all experienced men such is the operation of all Injunctions.
Injunction is as a rule known to *urge* people to actions;—men are never
*urged* to anything except what serves a useful purpose for them; and it
is with a view to guard against the contingency of the Injunction
becoming deprived of this *urging* force that we have to make the said
assumption (of passages declaring that omission involves sin). Though
the urging power could be secured also by assuming that the act
concerned leads to Heaven, yet, as such an idea would be inconsistent
with the conception that the act should be done *throughout life*, it
becomes necessary to conclude that the due performance saves one from
*sin*. To this end we have the assertion—‘even a hundred injunctions do
not secure that activity of men which is brought about by fear.’

From all this it is clear that when the text speaks of a man not doing
‘*what is enjoined*,’ it refers to the *compulsory acts*.

“In connection with bathing on touching an unclean thing, there are no
words indicating its compulsory character, like such expressions as
‘throughout life’ and the like.”

What is the need of any other words? What the text is understood to
indicate is that a certain act is to be done under certain specified
circumstances; and there is no need for any other driving agency. The
fact of the act being compulsory is expressed by the notion that
whenever the said circumstance presents itself, it should be done. In
the case of *Agnihotra* and such other rites also, we do not find the
texts actually containing the term ‘compulsory,’—the compulsory
character bring indicated only by the absolute certainty of the
condition mentioned (‘throughout life,’ in connection with the
Agnihotra).

‘*Addicted*’—Constantly using such sensual objects as richly cooked
food, sandal-paint and unguents, etc. This implies the character of
bring always given to such enjoyment.

“This has been already prohibited under 4.16, where it has been said
that—‘one shall not attach himself to sensual pleasures.’”

People think that since this latter passage occurs in connection with
the vows of the Accomplished Student, it cannot serve as a general
Prohibition. What occurs under ‘vows’ cannot be regarded as a
Prohibition; as what is enjoined under ‘vows’ is the taking of a certain
resolve, in some such form as—‘I shall not do such and such an act.’

Or, some one may be inclined to think that the former prohibition being
a slight one, the offence is not a serious one. With a view to guard
against this, the Author has put the offence on the same footing as
other serious offences.

Or, the explanation may be that it is often found that, even though
something has been forbidden in a general way, it is again forbidden
specifically, for the purpose of indicating its importance.

For instance, we often meet with such assertions as—‘The Brāhmaṇas have
come,—the *Vaśiṣṭhas* have also come.’

‘*Becomes liable to expiatory rites*’— The term ‘*prāyaścitta*,’
‘*expiatory rite*,’ is a conventional name applied to certain rites
performed under certain specified conditions, and the form
‘*prāyaścittīyate*’ is formed according to Pāṇini 3.1.85.

‘*Man*’— This term has been added for the purpose of indicating that
what is here stated applies to all the four castes.—(44)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.220), which notes that the use of
the general term ‘*naraḥ*’ implies that what is here said is applicable
to the ease of men born of reversed parentage; such general sins as
those of killing and the like being possible in their case also;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra p. 50), which adds that the verse is indicative
of those sins that accrue from the omission, through sloth, of the
obligatory duties;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta p. 6);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 10), which says that the meaning is that the act
is *sinful*, and hence involves expiation;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p.
351).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.44-47)**

*Mahābhārata* (12-34.2).—(Same as Manu 44)

*Gautama* (19.2-7).—‘A man in this world is polluted by a vile action,
such as sacrificing for men unworthy to offer sacrifices, eating
forbidden food, speaking what should not he spoken, neglecting what is
prescribed and doing what is forbidden. People are in doubt if such a
man shall, or shall not, perform a penance for such a deed. Some declare
that he shall not do it, because the deed must persist. The best opinion
is that he shall perform a penance. For it is declared in the Veda that
one who has performed the penance of *Punastoma* may come back to
partake of the Soma-libations.’

*Baudhāyana* (3.10.2-5).—\[The same as Gautama; but it adds ‘accepting
gifts from those whose gift should not be accepted;’ for ‘eats forbidden
food,’ it has ‘Eats the food of one whose food should not he eaten,’ and
it omits ‘speaking etc.’ and also ‘neglecting what is prescribed.’\]

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.1-2).—‘A penance shall be performed for an offence
committed unintentionally. Some declare that it shall he performed also
for those committed intentionally.’

Do. (22.1-5).—‘Now indeed man in this world speaks an untruth, or
sacrifices for men unworthy to offer a sacrifice, or accepts what should
not be accepted, or eats forbidden food, or does what should not be
done.’ (The rest as in Gautama).

*Yājñavalkya* (3.219-221).—‘A man becomes degraded by omitting to do
what is enjoined, by doing what is condemned, and by not controlling the
senses. Therefore for the purpose of purifying himself, he shall perform
expiatory penances; thus do the people and also his own inner soul
become appeased. By the performance of expiatory penances does that sin
disappear which had been committed unintentionally; if the sin had been
committed intentionally, the performance of the penances only makes the
man fit for being associated with; such being the declaration. Those who
commit sins, and yet do not perform the penances, nor repent their
misdeeds, fall into terrible hells.’

*Chāgaleya* (Aparārka, p. 1039).—‘The expiatory penances are for sins
committed unintentionally; for those committed intentionally, there is
no expiation.’

*Jābāli* (Parāśaramādhava-Prāyaścitta, p. 153).—‘The Brāhmaṇas prescribe
penances for sins committed unintentionally; some people prescribe them
also for those committed intentionally, for twice-born men as well as
for Śūdras.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘When a sin has been committed unintentionally, and only
once, there is expiation prescribed for it by persons versed in the Law.
If the sin is committed a second time, the penance shall he the double
of the former; if it is repeated for the third time, it shall he the
three-fold *Kṛcchra*; and for the fourth repetition, there is no
expiation. Nor is there any expiation for a sin committed even once, if
it has been committed intentionally. But some people lay down expiation
even for sins committed intentionally.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘If the sin has been committed unintentionally, penance
is performed; hut there is none for sins committed intentionally; even
if there be, it will have to be double of the former.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

श्रौतस्मार्तम् इज्याध्ययनादि **विहितम्**; **निन्दितं** च प्रतिषिद्धं **समाचरन्** हिंसानृतस्तेयादि, **प्रसक्तश् चेन्द्रियार्थेष्व्** अभिप्रेतपुरुषार्थसाधनेषु शब्दादिषु, **प्रायश्चित्तीयते नरः** । **नर**ग्रहणाद् वा सर्ववर्णधर्मो ऽयं गम्यते । ननु चेन्द्रियार्थप्रसङ्गस्य निन्दितग्रहणेनैव गृहीतत्वात् पुनरारंभो न न्याज्ज्य इति । अस्य परिहारः । येष्व् अस्याः प्रतिषेध **इन्द्रियार्थेषु** यथा मांसाशने ऽन्यायतः क्षत्रियादिस्त्रीपरिग्रहादौ च, तेष्व् अपि प्रकर्षे[ण] सक्तिप्रतिषेधार्थम् अस्य पृथग्ग्रहणं युक्तम् । कथम्, असौ **प्रायश्चित्तीयते** इति । यत इदम् उच्यते ॥ ११.४३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

044	A man who omits a prescribed act, or performs a blamable act, or cleaves to sensual enjoyments, must perform a penance.
</details>
