+++
title = "046 अकामतः कृतम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A sin committed unintentionally is expiated by the reciting of the Veda; while that committed intentionally, in folly, is expiated by the various forms of expiatory rites.—(46)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

किं पुनर् एतानि प्रायश्चित्तानि निमित्तमात्रपर्यवसायीनि संध्योपासनादिवत्, उत कार्यपर्यन्तानि शारीरशौचवद् उत्पन्नदोषनिर्घातार्थानि । 

- <u>तत्र</u> केचिद् आहुः । न हि कर्म क्षीयते । कार्यविरामित्वम्[^५०] एव धर्माधर्मयोः । न हि कर्माणि स्वफलम् अदत्वा प्रलीयन्ते । तद् उक्तम् "न हि कर्म क्षीयते" (बाउ १.४.१५) इति । तस्माद् यो ऽतिक्रमकारी स ततो नरकफलं भुङ्क्त एव[^५१] । प्रायश्चित्तानि यदि न करोति ततस् तदतिक्रमात् प्रत्यवायान्तरोत्पत्तिः । 


[^५१]:
     M G: evaṃ


[^५०]:
     M G: -virāgitvam

- <u>तद् एतद्</u> अयुक्तम्, "न हि कर्म" । "चरितव्यम् अतो नित्यं प्रायश्चित्तं विशुद्धये" (म्ध् ११.५२) इति[^५२] स्वशब्देनैव शुद्ध्यर्थता विहिता । तथा च[^५३] तैः कृतैर् अपोहेत पापम्, स्वयं कृतत्वात् । 


[^५३]:
     M G: tathāpi


[^५२]:
     M G J: viśudhyata iti; most editors have failed to note that this is a citation

- <u>तद् अप्य्</u> उच्यते- प्रतिषेधविधिना प्रतिषिध्यमानक्रियाकर्तुः प्रत्यवायभागित्वम् अवगमितम् । न तस्य प्रायश्चित्तैर् मिथ्यात्वं शक्यते कर्तुम् ।

- <u>तद् अप्य्</u> अयुक्तम्, यतस् तेन दुःखहेतुता तस्यावगमिता । प्रायश्चित्तेष्व् अपि तपोदानादि दुःखम् अस्त्य् एव । अल्पेन तादात्मिकेन दुःखेनागामिनः संभाव्यमानस्य महतो दुःखस्य निवृत्तिर् युक्तैव, यथा व्याधेस् तिक्तकटुकौषधदानलघ्वाहारादिना । यथा व्यतिक्रमं कृत्वा कश्चित् स्वयम् आगत्य राजनि वेदनं करोति "इत्य् एवं कर्मास्मि" इति, सो ऽर्धदण्डभाग् भवति । यस् तु राजपुरुषैर् हठाद् आनीयेत स भूयो दण्ड्यते । 

- एवम् उपदेशानाम् अर्थवत्वसिद्धिः । अतः स्वयं कार्यविरोधित्वम्[^५४] अस्य विहितत्वात् । निष्कृतिः प्रायश्चित्तम् इति समाख्यातम् अपि सत्[^५५] तद् एव कृतदोषस्य निर्यातनम् अपि । अकारणं निर्यातो निष्कृतिर् इति उच्यते । एवं प्रायश्चित्तम् अपि नास्याधिकारप्रतिप्रसवार्थम् । पञ्चानाम् एव पातकानाम् अधिकारोपगमविहितत्वाद् द्विजातिकर्मभ्यो हानिः पतनम् इति । 


[^५५]:
     M G: tat


[^५४]:
     M G: svakāryavirodhitvam

- न चात्र "वेदाभ्यासो ऽकामतः कामतस् तपः" इति विषयविभागो बोद्धव्यः । उभयार्थोभयत्रोपदर्शनार्थत्वात्, निमित्तोपदेशकरणे पठितत्वात्, "ब्रह्महा द्वादश" (म्ध् ११.७१) इत्यादिप्रायश्चित्तानाम् उपक्रम्यमाणत्वात् । तस्माद् अकामतो लघुप्रायश्चित्तं कामतो गरीय इति श्लोकस्य तात्पर्यम् ।

- <u>ननु</u> चाकामतो नैव तस्य कर्तृत्वम्, बुद्धिपूर्वं कुर्वन् कर्तेत्य् उच्यते । यथा च लौकिकः- "दैवेन कार्यते, किम् अयं करोति" इति । किं च लिप्सया यत्र प्रवृत्तिस् तत्र प्रतिषेधः । यो हि मद्याय[^५६] स्पृहयति स पिपासुं न कदर्थयति "मा पासीः सुराम्" इति । यस् तु जलार्थी जलबुद्ध्या सुरां पीतवांस् तस्याजानतो नापराधो न हि तस्य सुरालिप्सया प्रवृत्तिः । <u>अथोच्यते-</u> विधिलक्षणप्रवृत्तिर् न निषिध्यते । <u>सत्यं</u> । भवत्य् अर्थलक्षणानां तु[^५७] मध्ये तर्ह्य् उदकेन च सर्वस्या अर्थलक्षणायाः प्रतिषेधः । 


[^५७]:
     M G: arthalakṣaṇā | na tu


[^५६]:
     M G: madyapaḥ

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः । प्रत्यवायपर्यन्तो विधिर् विषभक्षणवन् निषेधशास्त्रार्थः । तेषाम् अचोद्यम् एतत् । विषम् अविशेषेणोपात्तं ज्ञानतो ऽज्ञानतश् च मरणाय कल्पत एव । एवं ब्रह्महत्यादयो ऽपीति । येषाम् अपि "कर्तव्यम्" इति वचनात् क्रियते, "न कर्तव्यम्" इति न क्रियते, तेषाम् अपि लौकिकक्रियया प्रवर्तमानस्य निषेधः प्रवर्तमानश् चोच्यते प्रवृत्तः कर्ता । कर्तृत्वम् अबुद्धिपूर्वकम् अप्य् अस्ति, कूले[^५८] पततीति । न चायं गौणः[^५९] कर्तृताभावः । "स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता" इति हि स्मर्यते, न "इच्छया प्रवर्तते यः स कर्ता" इति । किं चास्माद् एव वचनात् प्रमादकृतो दोषो ऽस्ति, प्रायश्चित्तम् इति, किम् अपरेण विकल्पितेन ॥ ११.४६ ॥


[^५९]:
     M G: gauṇa-


[^५८]:
     M G: kūlaṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Question*.—“Do these Expiatory Rites end only with their performance
(without bringing about any effects), just like the Twilight Prayers and
other rites? Or, do they continue until definite effects are produced,
in the form of the actual removal of the guilt like the act of cleansing
the body (which ends only with the actual removal of the dirt)?”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—As a
matter of fact no action is ever lost; both merit and demerit (due to
actions) end only with the bringing about of their effects; no actions
ever disappear until they have brought about their effects. This is what
is meant by the assertion that ‘no action is ever lost’ Hence the man
who commits a transgression *must* experience the tortures of hell, as
the result of that transgression, \[so that no expiation of any
transgression is possible\]; and the only effect of his not performing
the prescribed expiatory rite would be that he shall also transgress the
law laying down such rite, and thus commit a further offence.

This, however, is not right Because, simply because the texts lay down
that the rite shall be performed, such rite does not become *compulsory*
\[and it is only the omission of a compulsory act that involves sin\].
All that is said is that the man becomes ‘cleansed’; from which it is
clear that this *cleansing* is the purpose served by the expiatory rite.
So that when expiatory rites are performed, one would wash off his sins;
and this would he done because of the sin having been committed by the
man himself.

It has been argued above that—“all that has been indicated is that sin
is incurred by the man who commits an act that has been forbidden by a
prohibitive text; and not that the sin becomes nullified by means of
expiations.”

But this also is not right. Because what has been indicated is that the
said act becomes a source of suffering; now in Expiation also there is
much suffering in the form of penances and charities; and it is quite
possible that the small amount of suffering undergone in the shape of
these latter should prevent the onset of the greater sufferings
threatening in the future. Just as a serious disease is prevented by the
eating of bitter medicines and keeping on low diet; or again, when a man
having committed an offence surrenders himself to the king and confesses
his guilt, saying—‘I have done such and such an act,’—the punishment
inflicted upon such a man is only half of what is prescribed for that
offence; while if he were arrested by the king’s officers and brought to
court, his punishment would be much severer.

Thus it is that the utility of the injunctions in question (of
expiations) becomes established. That the rites are destructive of the
effects of sins has to be admitted on the strength of the injunctions
themselves. It is for this reason that these rites have been called
‘expiatory’ of sins; for the sin is said to be ‘expiated’ only when it
has become deprived of its causal efficiency.

For the same reason the Expiatory Rite cannot be regarded as restoring
the rights and privileges lost by. reason of the guilt; since it is only
in the case of the five most heinous offences that any loss of
privileges has been mentioned,—the very term ‘becoming an outcast’
meaning *the loss of the privileges of the caste*.

In connection with the present context it should not be understood that
any such marked distinction is intended as that ‘in the case of
*unintentional* offences the expiation consists in the reciting of the
Veda, and in that of *intentional* offences of penances’;—because as a
matter of fact both kinds of expiation have been laid down in connection
with both kinds of offences; specially as every rule regarding an
expiatory rite starts off with the defining of the occasion for
expiation; *e.g.,* ‘The Slayer of a Brāhmaṇa shall make a cut, etc,
etc.’ (11.72)

Thus then, all that the verse means is that—‘there is heavy expiation in
the case of intentional offences, and a lighter one in that of
unintentional ones.’

“In fact when a man commits an act unintentionally, he is not the *doer*
of that act; as one is called the ‘doer’of an act only when he does it
intentionally; as we find people making such assertions as—‘This man is
not doing such and such an act, he is being made by fate to do it’
Further, it is only as done with a distinct motive towards it that an
act forms the subject of a prohibition; *e.g*., it is only when a man
evinces a desire for drinking wine that he is told ‘not to drink the
wine’; and if a man eager for a drink of water drinks wine thinking it
to be water, he does not incur any guilt; and this for the simple reason
that his action has not been prompted by the motive to drink wine. It
might be argued that it is only an action that has formed the subject of
an Injunction that cannot be forbidden. This is quite true, so far as
actions without a purpose are concerned; but of actions with a purpose,
a prohibition is always possible.”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—What
forms the subject-matter of prohibitive texts is the affirmation of an
act as extending up to the sin that its commitment involves; just as it
does in the case of taking poison.

For these people the objection has no force at all. As regards the
taking of ‘poison,’ there can be no distinction as to its being done
intentionally or unintentionally; in either case the act must lead to
death.

Similarly in the case of such acts as ‘the Slaying of a Brāhmaṇa’ and
the like.

According to some people an act is done because of the declaration that
*it shall be done*, and it is not done because of the declaration that
*it shall not be done*. And by this view also prohibitions apply to only
one who is going to do some ordinary act; it is only when a man is going
to do an act that he is called its ‘doer.’ But a man can be a ‘doer’
even without knowing it, as when he falls down a river-bank. It cannot
be said that in such a case the man is called a ‘doer’ only in the
figurative sense; because the *doer* (nominative) has been defined only
as ‘one who is his own master regarding the act,’ and not as ‘one who
does an act *intentionally*

Further, from the present text itself it is clear that even acts due to
sheer negligence have been held to involve sin, and hence necessitate
expiation. What is the need of any further assumptions?—(46)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā*, (3.226), to the effect that the sin
accruing from ‘*non-degrading*’ offences even when intentional, is wiped
off by the performance of expiatory rites;—in *Aparārka*, (p. 1040)—in
*Madanapārijāta*, (p. 705);—in *Prāyaścittaviveka*, (p. 18), which says
that all that is meant by the mention of ‘*Vedabhyāsa*’ is that the
expiation of *unintentional* delinquencies is lighter than that for
*intentional* ones,—it explains ‘*pṛthagvidhaiḥ*’ as ‘other kinds of
expiation’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*, (p. 354).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.44-47)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
11.44].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तथा चोत्तरत्र प्रदर्शयिष्यामो विशेषम् अनयोः"कामतो ब्राह्मणवधे निष्कृतिर् न विधीयते" इति । एवमादौ चायं नियमार्थः श्लोकः । **अकामतो** वेदाभ्यासः, **कामतः** कृतस्यान्यद् विविधं प्रायश्चित्तम् इति । यस्माद् उभयम् उभयोर् उत्तरत्र वक्ष्यति । इयांस् त्व् अनयोर् विशेषः । अकामतो व्यतिक्रमे ऽल्पः प्रत्य्क़्वायः, कामतो महान् । तथा चोक्तं **कामतस् तु कृतं मोहात् प्रायश्चित्तैः पृथग्विधैर्** इति । अपरः पुनर् आह- नैव प्रायश्चित्तानुष्ठानम् उपपद्यते । यस्मान् न हि कर्म क्षीयते ऽन्तरेण कार्यारंभम् । वातपित्तश्लेष्माशयवत् । यत इदम् उच्यते । कर्तव्यम् एवेदम् स्मृतिशास्त्रोपदेससामर्थ्यात् । यथैव हि धर्माधर्मप्राप्तिपरिहारव्यवस्थायाम् आगम एव प्रमाणं नोपपत्तिः, एवं विनाशो ऽप्यागमत एव कर्मणः किं न श्रद्धीयते । तथा च सति प्रायश्चित्तं न्यायोपदेशम् । इतरथाप्यर्धवैशसं स्याद् इति । एवं च पुरुषार्थकारित्वं शास्त्रस्योपपद्यते, लघूपायक्षिप्रदर्शनेन महतो ऽर्थलक्षणात् क्षयात् प्रायश्चित्तात् । अपि चास्यात्मसंयमदुःखम् अतिमहद् अस्ति । यतः अत्रापि कार्याद् एवास्य व्यतिक्रमाधर्मस्य दुःखलक्षणाद् विनाशं प्रतिपद्यामहे । यथा च वाताद्याशयस्योभयम् अत्यनीकं औषधं दुःखं च, एवम् अधर्मस्यापि प्रायश्चित्तं नरकादिदुःखानुभवश् च स्याद् विनाशहेतुः । एतेन वृश्चिकविषं व्याख्यातम्, श्रुतिर् अपि च प्रायश्चित्ताद् अकुशलकर्माणि यथा गेहदाहादीनि निमित्तानि नैमित्तिकानां कर्मणां स्वर्गफलानाम् इति, यथा क्षामवतीष्टिः । अत्र ब्रूमः प्रतिषेधवत्सु निमित्तेषु प्रायश्चित्तान्य् उच्यन्ते, यतस् तानि दोषनिर्हरणार्थान्य् एव प्रतीयन्ते । यथा चिक्तिसायां दोषवत्सु निमित्तेषु ज्वरादिषु विशोषणादीनि (?) । स्फुटम् एव च स्मृतिर् उपरिष्टाद् वक्ष्यति — "चरितव्यम् अतो नित्यं प्रायश्चित्तं विशुद्धये" इत्य् एवमादि । अपरे त्व् अधिकारार्थानि । तथा च गौतमः "द्विजातिकर्मभ्यः हानिः पतनम्" इत्य् आह । ब्रह्महत्यायाम् एवैतत् । पातकपदार्थावधारणार्थे वाक्ये श्रूयते, न त्व् अन्यस्मिन् व्यतिक्रमवाक्ये । दोषक्षयाद् एव च कर्मान्तराधिकारो विज्ञेयः, नाक्षीनदोषस्य । यथातुरस्येति । यच् च निमित्ते कर्माङ्गं प्रायश्चित्तम् इति कैश्चिद् उच्यते, तच् च पुरुषधर्मत्वाद् अत्र न संभवति । प्रायश्चित्तस्य व्यतिक्रमस्य कारणम् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ११.४५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

046	A sin unintentionally committed is expiated by the recitation of Vedic texts, but that which (men) in their folly commit intentionally, by various (special) penances.
</details>
