+++
title = "058 रेतःसेकः स्वयोनीषु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Carnal intercourse with one’s uterine sister, or with virgins, or with low-born women, or with the women of one’s friend or son,—all this they regard as equal to the ‘violating of the Preceptor’s bed.’—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्वयोनयो** भगिन्य एकोदरसंभूताः । **कुमार्यो** ऽनूढाः । **अन्त्यजा** बर्बरचण्डालस्त्रियः । **सख्युः** । सखा मित्रम्, तस्य **स्त्रियः** । **स्त्री**ग्रहणं न जायायाम् एव प्रतिषेधर्थम् । एवं **पुत्रस्य्**आन्यापि या अवरुद्धा मैथुनधर्मेण । 

- वयं तु ब्रूमः । सत्य् अपि स्त्रीग्रहणेन[^७५] ऊढानूढयोर् विषमसमीकरणस्यान्यायत्वात्[^७६] समत्ववचनम् । एतन् न प्रायश्चित्तनिर्देशार्थम्, किं तर्हि गुरुत्वख्यापनपरम् । अतश् च गुरुतरं प्रायश्चित्तं भवति । तथा चोक्तम् "एनःसु[^७७] गुरूणि गुरूणि लघुनि लघूनि" (ग्ध् १९.१९) । यदि ह्य् एतत् प्रायश्चित्तनिर्देशार्थम् अभविष्यत् प्रायश्चित्तनिदेशप्रकरण[^७८] एव वावक्ष्यत् । कौटसाक्ष्यसुहृद्वधयोश् चेह सुरापानसमीकृतयोर् ब्रह्महत्याप्रायश्चित्तातिदेशम् उपरिष्टान् न कुर्यात् । "गुरोश् चालीकनिर्बन्धः" (म्ध् ११.५४) इत्य् एतस्य चेह ब्रह्महत्यासमीकृतस्य पुनर् उपरिष्टात् ब्रह्महत्याप्रायश्चित्ताभिधानात् । तथा कुमार्याम् इति रेतःसेकस्य गुरुतल्पसमीकृतस्येह पुनस् तत्र गुरुतल्पप्रायश्चित्तविधानाद्, गम्यते नेदं प्रायश्चित्तार्थं समीकरणम् इति । 


[^७८]:
     M G: prāyaścittaṃ


[^७७]:
     M G J: enasi


[^७६]:
     M G: viṣayasamīkaraṇasya nyāyatvāt


[^७५]:
     M G omit: strī-

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्यन्ते- भेदेन समीकरणं गुरुत्वभावे ऽपि वक्ष्यते, नान्यय्यम्[^७९] । अतः प्रायश्चित्तार्थम्[^८०] एव सुरापानस्य समीकृतयोश् च कौटसाक्ष्यसुहृद्वध्योर् ब्रह्महत्याप्रायश्चित्तनिर्देशो विकल्पार्थम् सुरापानप्रायश्चित्तेन । अस्य चातिदेश एव श्रूयते । समीकरणे तु विकल्पो नास्ति । यथा "हत्वा गर्भम् अविज्ञातम्" इति (म्ध् ११.८६) ॥ ११.५८ ॥


[^८०]:
     M F: -ārthānām


[^७९]:
     M G: na tyājyam

_इदानीम् उपपातकान्य् आह ।_
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Uterine sisters*’—sisters horn of the same mother as oneself.

‘*Virgins*’— unmarried women.

‘*Low-born women*’—wild women.

‘*Friend*’—companion; his ‘*women*.’

The use of the generic term ‘women’ indicates that it is not only the
*wife* that is meant What is meant is a woman *kept* for carnal
purposes, by the friend or the son.

What we hold however is that, even though the text has used the generic
term^(‘)women,’ yet it cannot be regarded as putting the *married* and
the *unmarried* women on the same footing; because such an equalisation
would be highly unreasonable.

What is said here is not for the purpose of indicating what the exact
expiatory rite in the case should be, but with a view to indicate \[the
seriousness of the crime; which, of course, means that\] the expiation
also should be heavy. This is what has been set forth in the
declaration—‘these shall be heavy in the case of serious, and light in
that of lighter, crimes.’ If all this were for this purpose of
indicating the exact expiatory rite, it should have occurred under the
section dealing with these rites proper. Further, since^(‘)bearing false
witness,’ and^(‘)slaying of a friend,’ are here placed on the same
footing as^(‘)wine-drinking,’ the expiation for these could not be
prescribed as the same as that in the case
of^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing’;—secondly, the^(‘)falsely harassing the
Preceptor’ has here been declared to be equal to^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing,’
and yet later on it has been considered necessary to lay down again for
this offence the same expiation as for^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing’;—thirdly,
carnal intercourse with a^(‘)virgin’ has here been said to be equal to
the^(‘)violating of the Preceptor’s bed,’ and yet it was considered
necessary to prescribe again for this offence the same expiation as that
for the said^(‘)violating of the Preceptor’s bed.’ From all this it is
clear that the present equalising of the various sins here with one or
the other of the heinous offences is not meant to be an injunction of
the necessary expiatory rites.

Other people think that even though all that is meant is to indicate the
seriousness of the crimes, yet there is nothing unreasonable in the
equalisation here set forth; which may, therefore, be taken as meant to
indicate the exact expiations. As for the fact that, even
though^(‘)bearing false witness,’ and ‘slaying a friend’ are here put on
the same footing as^(‘)winedrinking.’ yet the exact expiation for it has
been prescribed to be the same as that for Brāhmaṇa-killing,—this means
simply that the two expiations are meant to be optional. Where there is
absolute equalisation, there can be no option; as is clear from Verse 87
below.—(58)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.231), to the effect that the
‘intercourse’ meant here is the actual consummation of the act, as is
clear from the use of the term ‘*retaḥseka*’;—in *Aparārka* (p. 1048),
which also adds that if the intercourse ceases before actual emission,
the offence is not equal to the ‘violation of the Teacher’s bed—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta p. 251), which adds that this refers to
cases where, the act is repeated for fifteen days;—in *Madanapārijāta*
(p. 844), which notes that the use of the expression ‘*retaḥseka*’
indicates that if the act ceases before emission, it involves an
expiation lighter than that in the case of ‘the violation of the
Teacher’s bed’;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 177), which has the
following notes—‘*Svayonyāsu*’, Sapiṇḍa-women, and such women as are
blood-relations of one’s father or mother,—‘*kumārīṣu*’ Brāhmaṇa
virgins,—‘*Antyajāsu*’, Caṇḍāla and other low-born girls,—‘*Sakhyuḥ
strīṣu*’, wives of Brāhmaṇa friends,—‘*putrastrīṣu*’, wives of sons born
of wives of different castes, or wives of sons other than the ‘body
born’.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.58-66)  
**

*Gautama* (21.1).—(See under 54.)

Do. (21.11).—‘The guilt of a minor offence rests on those who are
defilers of company, or killers of kine, or those who forget the Veda,
those who pronounce the Vedic texts for sinners, students who break the
vow of chastity, and those who allow the time of initiation to pass.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.5, 13).—‘Trading with merchandise of any description;
the following are the minor offences involving loss of caste.
Intercourse with women who should not he approached, cohabitation with
the female friend of a female *Guru*, with the female friend of a male
*Guru*, with an *Apapātra* woman, and a female outcast,—following the
medical profession, sacrificing for the multitude, living by the stage,
following the profession of the dancing master, or singing master or
acting master, tending cows and buffaloes, and so forth, and also
fornication.’

*Āpastamba* (1.21.7-9, 14-15, 17-18).—‘The following acts cause loss of
caste: stealing gold, crimes that make one accused, homicide, neglect of
the Vedas, causing abortion, incestuous connection with relations born
of the same womb as one’s father or mother, or with the offsprings of
such relations, drinking wine, intercourse with persons intercourse with
whom is forbidden. That man falls who has connection with a female
friend of a female *Guru*, or with a female friend of a male *Guru*, or
with any married woman. Eating forbidden flesh, as of a dog, a man, a
village-cock or village pigs, or carnivorous animals; eating what is
left by a Śūdra, the cohabitation of Aryans with *Apapātra* women. Some
say that these also lead to loss of caste.’

*Viṣṇu* (36.4-7).—‘Sexual connection with a paternal aunt, with the
maternal grandmother, with a maternal aunt, with the mother-in-law, with
the Queen—are crimes equal to connection with a *guru’s* wife;—and so is
sexual intercourse with the father’s or mother’s sister, and with one’s
own sister;—and sexual connection with the wife of a learned Brāhmaṇa,
or a priest, or an *Upādhyāya*, or a friend;—and with a sister’s female
friend, or with a woman of one’s own race, with a woman belonging to the
Brāhmaṇa caste, with a Brāhmaṇa maiden, with a low-caste woman, with a
woman in her courses, with a woman come for protection, with a female
ascetic, or with a woman entrusted to one’s own care.’

Do. (37.6-10, 13-33).—‘Abandoning one’s holy fire, or father, mother,
son or wife;—eating forbidden food, or food of those whose food should
not he eaten;—appropriating to one’s self what belongs to
another;—sexual intercourse with another man’s wife; sacrificing for
persons for whom it is forbidden to sacrifice;—killing a Kṣatriya or a
Vaiśya or a Śūdra, or a cow,—selling articles that should not be
sold,—for an elder brother to suffer his younger brother to marry before
him, for a younger brother to marry before his elder brother,—to give a
girl in marriage to either of these two,—or to perform the nuptial
ceremony for him,—to allow the proper time for *Upanayana* to pass
off,—to teach the Veda for a reward,—to he taught the Veda by a hired
teacher,—to be employed in mines,—to make large instruments,—cutting
trees, shrubs, creepers, long climbing plants, or herbs,—to make a
living by prostituting one’s own wife,—trying to overcome others by
incantations or forcible means; cooking for one’s own self,—omitting to
pay one’s debts to God, Sages and *Pitṛs*,—studying irreligious
hooks,—Atheism,—subsisting by a reprehensible act,—intercourse with
woman who drinks wine;—these are crimes of the fourth degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.231, 234-42).—‘Intercourse with a friend’s wife, with a
maiden, with one’s own offsprings, with a Caṇḍāla woman, with one’s
*Sagotra* woman, with one’s sons’ wives,—is declared to be equal to the
violating of the *guru’s* bed. Killing cows, apostacy, theft,
non-payment of debts, omitting to establish the sacred fires, selling
what should not be sold, marrying before the elder brother, learning
Veda from a hired teacher, teaching the Veda for payment, adultery,
permitting one’s self to be superseded in marriage by the younger
brother, usury, manufacturing salt, killing a woman, a Vaiśya, a Śūdra
or a Kṣatriya, making a living through reprehensible things, atheism,
breaking the vow of celibacy, selling of sons, stealing grains or base
metals or cattle, sacrificing for those not entitled to perform
sacrifices, abandoning of father, mother or son, selling of tanks or
gardens, defiling a maiden, sacrificing for one who has married before
his elder brother and giving of girl in marriage to such a person,
dishonesty, omitting of the observances and restrictions, undertaking of
an act for one’s own benefit, intercourse with a wine-drinking woman,
abandoning of Vedic study or of the sacred fires, neglecting one’s sons,
forsaking of relatives, cutting trees for fuel, making a living by one’s
own wife, or by medicines or by killing, making of murderous machines,
being addicted to vicious habits, selling one’s self, serving under a
Śūdra, making friendships with low men, intercourse with low-born women,
omitting the prescribed life-stages, getting fat with food given by
others, studying of evil sciences, superintending mines, selling one’s
wife;—each of these is a *minor sin*, an *upapātaka*.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

महापातकसमानां चतुर्भिः श्लोकैर् निर्देशो गुरुत्वज्ञापनार्थः । सामान्यविहितस्यात्र गुरोः प्रायश्चित्तस्य कारणं यथा स्याद् इति । स्मृत्यन्तरे चोक्तम्- "एनसु(?) गुरुषु गुरूणि लघुषु लघूनि" इति । ननु यत् येन समानम् उच्यते तदीयं तस्य प्रायश्चित्तं युक्तम् । अत्रोच्यते । न युक्तं यदि ह्य् एतत् प्रायश्चित्तविधानर्थम् अभविष्यत्, यथाह भववान्, ततः प्रायश्चित्तातिदेसप्रकरण एवावक्ष्यत् । कौटसाक्ष्यसुहृद्वधयोश् चेह सुरापानसमीकृतयोः ब्रह्महत्यप्रायस्चित्तातिदेशम् उपरिष्टान् न कुर्यात् । गुरोश् चाऌईकनिर्बन्ध इत्य् एतस्य चेह ब्रह्महत्यासमीकृतस्य पुनर् उपर्तिष्टाद् (?) ब्रह्महत्याप्रयस्चित्तविधानात् । तथा कुमार्यादिरेतस्सेकस्य गुरुतल्पसमीक्ष्तस्येह पुनस् तत्र गुरुतल्पप्रायस्चित्तविधानाद् गम्यते नेदं प्रायस्चित्तार्थं समीकरणम् इति । अपरे तु मन्यन्ते — भेदेन समीकरणाद् यद् येन समीक्रियते तदीयं तस्य प्रायस्चित्तम् अनुमीयते । गुरुत्व हि केवले निदिदिक्षिते, महापातकसमत्वम् एव प्रतिनिर्दिशेत् सामान्येन । सुरापानसमीकृतयोश् च कौटसाक्ष्यसुहृद्वधयोर् ब्रह्महत्यातिदेशो विकल्पर्थः । गुरोस् च प्रतिरम्भो ऽलीकाद् अर्थान्तरम् एव । प्रायस्चित्तकरणे चास्यानध्ययनात् सामान्यविहितम् अप्य् एषु प्रायस्चित्तम् अनुमीयते । यस्य तु प्रायश्चित्तातिदेश एव श्रूयते न समीकरणम्; तत्र विकल्प् नास्ति । यथा "हत्वा गर्भम् अविज्ञातम्" इति । तस्मान् महापातकसमेषु तदीयं प्रायश्चित्तं सामन्यविहितं (?) वेति मन्यामहे । महापातकानि तत्समानि चोक्त्वोपपातकार्थम् अधुनेदम् आह ॥ ११.५७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

059	Carnal intercourse with sisters by the same mother, with (unmarried) maidens, with females of the lowest castes, with the wives of a friend, or of a son, they declare to be equal to the violation of a Guru's bed.
</details>
