+++
title = "061 कन्याया दूषणम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Defiling a maiden, usury, breaking of a vow, selling a tank, a garden, one’s wife or a child.—(61)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कन्याया दूषणम्** "नेयं कन्या पुरुषेणोपभुका" इत्य् अध्यवसायेन प्रतिपादनम् । अङ्गुष्ठादिना वा प्रजननं धर्मभेदो मैथुनधर्मवर्जम् । तत्र हि गुरुतल्पसाम्यम् उक्तम् । **वार्धुषित्वं** अनापदि[^८७] धनप्रयोगेन वृत्तिग्रहणम् । वासिष्ठे तु "वृद्धेस् तु प्रयोक्ता धान्यानां वार्धिषित्वं तद् उच्यते" । सा च शास्त्रपरिभाषा । न लौकिके वा पदार्थे । **व्रतच्युतिः** शिष्टप्रतिषिद्धे[^८८] ऽमुष्यगृहे न बोक्तव्यम् उपवस्तव्यम् एवंरूपः संकल्पो व्रतम् । ततो यः संकल्पाच् चलति सा तस्य **व्रतच्युतिः** ।


[^८८]:
     M G: aśiṣṭa-


[^८७]:
     M G: dhanāpadi

- <u>ननु</u> च व्रतम् इति इच्छाकृतो[^८९] नियम उच्यते । यदि चेच्छाकृतः[^९०] संकल्पस् ततो निवृत्तौ कः शास्त्रातिक्रमः, "विहितम् अकुर्वन् प्रायश्चित्तीयते" (म्ध् ११.४३) इत्य् उक्तम् । न चैतद् विहितम् ।


[^९०]:
     M G: coditaś cec chāstrakṛtaḥ


[^८९]:
     M G: śāstrato

- <u>उच्यते</u> । सत्यम्, इच्छालक्षण आरम्भः । समाप्तिस् तु शास्त्रीया । यथा सौर्यादीनां[^९१] काम्यानां कर्मणां लिप्सातः प्रवृत्तिः, समाप्तिस् तु शास्त्रीया । अतितायां फलेच्छायाम् अवाप्ते वा[^९२] फले यथोक्तं तदर्थ एवावशिष्टं वर्जयेयुः ( + + ) प्राक्रमिको ऽयं कापुरुष इति वदन्तः । स्नातकव्रतानां त्व् अत्यन्तलघीयः प्रायश्चित्तं प्रवक्ष्यते । तेनेदं विकल्पितुम् अर्हति । 


[^९२]:
     M G omit: vā


[^९१]:
     M G: saundaryādīnāṃ

- **आराम** उद्यानोपवनादि । स्मृत्यन्तरे सर्वभूम्र् अविक्रेया ॥ ११.६१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Defiling a maiden*’;—*i.e*., having recourse to her in the spirit of
bravado that ‘she has not yet been touched by man’; or, the depriving
her of her chastity by touching her generative organ with the toe or
such other parts of the body;—in fact doing all these, with the sole
exception of actual sexual intercourse;—which latter has been declared
to be equal to ‘the violating of the Preceptor’s bed.’

‘*Usury*’— Making money by this means as a means of living,—even in
normal times. Vaśiṣṭha has declared that ‘usury consists in lending
money or grains on interest.’ This is a scriptural technicality, not
subject to the notions of the ordinary world.

‘*Breaking of a vow*.’—A ‘vow’ consists in the taking of such resolution
as—‘I shall rather starve than partake of food in the house of such and
such a person eating at whose place is forbidden’; and if one does not
keep to this resolve, it would be ‘breaking of the vow.’

“As a matter of fact, the name ‘vow,’ *vrata*, is given to a restriction
that one voluntarily puts upon himself; and if the resolve is a
voluntary one, how could deviation from that constitute a transgression
of the scriptures? it has been said that ‘by omitting to do what is
enjoined one becomes liable to expiation’; and the resolution in the
case in question is not ‘what is enjoined.”’

The answer to this is as follows:—It is true that in the initial stage
the vow is purely voluntary; but the *keeping* of it is what has been
‘enjoined’ by the scriptures. Just as in the case of the Saurya and
other sacrifices performed with a view to definite rewards,—the act, in
its initial stage, is purely voluntary; but the continuation and
completion of it (when once begun) is what is ‘enjoined’; the act could
be discontinued only either if the performer had ceased to desire the
particular reward, or if the reward were actually obtained; in all such
cases the performer would be blamed as being energetic only in
undertaking an act.

As regards the observances to be kept by the Accomplished Student, the
text is going to lay down a very light expiation for the neglect of
these. And this may be regarded as an optional alternative to what is
here laid down.

‘*Garden*’— flower-gardens and parks, etc.

Another *Smṛti* declares all kinds of land as ‘not to be sold.’—(61)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vratalopanam*’.—‘Breaking a vow voluntarily taken’ (Medhātithi and
Nārāyaṇa):—‘breaking the vow of Studentship’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 192), which has the
following notes—‘*Kanyāyā dūṣaṇam*’ calling a virgin a ‘non-virgin’, or
piercing with the finger her private parts,—‘*vārdhuṣitvam*’ (which is
its reading for ‘*vārdhuṣyam*’) for the Brāhmaṇa or the
Kṣātriya,—‘*vratāt cyutiḥ*’ (which is its reading for ‘*vratalopanam*’),
‘*avakīrṇitvam*’, sexual delinquency of the Religious
Student,—‘*dāraṇām*’, even such as have not been married by
one,—‘*apatyasya*’, of the various kinds of children.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.58-66)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
11.58].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

062	Defiling a damsel, usury, breaking a vow, selling a tank, a garden, one's wife, or child,
</details>
