+++
title = "072 ब्रह्महा द्वादश"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa-slayer shall, for his purification, build a hut in the forest, live there for twelve years, subsisting on alms; making for himself a flag consisting of the head of the dead man.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तृणपर्णादिकृतो निकेतो वर्षातपशीतत्राणादिहेतुर् गृहं **कुटीति** कथ्यते । **समा** वर्षाणि । **भैक्षाशी** इति । स्मृत्यन्तरे सप्तागारम् अनभिसंहितं च भैक्ष्यम् उक्तम् । **शवशिरो** हतस्यान्यस्य वा । 

<u>ध्वजे</u>** काष्ठादिमयीं शिरःप्रतिकृतिम् उद्यतां धारयेद् इत् मन्यते[^१०१] । 



[^१०१]:
     M G: manyante

- <u>नैवं</u> शब्दार्थविदः । न हि तच्छवशिर इत्य् उच्यते । 

- अन्यो ऽप्य् अत्र विधिर् भविष्यति "कृतवापनो निवसेत्" (म्ध् ११.७७) इत्यादि ॥ ११.७२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

^(‘)*Hut*’—a house built of grass and leaves, capable of resisting rain,
heat and cold.

‘*Samāḥ*’—years.

‘*Subsisting on alms*.’—Another Smṛti text lays down that these alms
shall be obtained from twelve houses, not in close proximity to one
another.

‘*The head of the dead man*’—Either the head of the man killed by him,
or a wooden or some other image of the head, shall be held aloft Such is
the explanation given by some people.

But men knowing the right meaning of words do not accept this
explanation as this is not what is meant by the term ‘*śavaśiraḥ*.’

Other rules to be observed by the man are going to be described under
78.—(72)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Prāyaścitta, p. 399).

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 787);—in *Aparārka* (p. 1053), to
the effect that the man should place a human skull on the top of a
flag;—in *Mitākṣarā* (3.243), which explains the first half as
prescribing living in the forest and the phrase ‘*kṛtvā
śavaśirodhvajam*’ as meaning that the man shall carry a staff placing at
its top the skull of the man murdered by him;—in *Śuddhikaumdī* (p.
241), which says that the year meant here is the ‘*sāvana*’ one’;—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 62 and 522), which says that he is to have
recourse to ‘begging alms’ only when wild growing fruits are not
available.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.72-86)**

*Gautama* (22.2-6).—‘He who has intentionally slain a Brāhmaṇa shall
emaciate himself and thrice throw himself into the fire;—or he may
become in battle the target for armed men;—or remaining chaste, he may,
during twelve years, enter the village only for the purpose of
begging,—carrying the foot of a bedstead and a skull in his hand, and
proclaiming his deed. If he meets an *Ārya*, he shall step out of the
road. Standing by day and sitting at night, and bathing in the morning,
at noon and in the evening, he may be purified after twelve years,—or by
saving the life of a Brāhmaṇa; or if he is thrice vanquished in trying
to recover the property of a Brāhmaṇa stolen by robbers, or by bathing
with the priests at the end of the *Āśvamedha* sacrifice;—or at the end
of any other sacrifice, provided that an Agniṣṭut forms part of it. The
same penance should be performed even if he has attempted the life of a
Brāhmaṇa, but failed to kill him; likewise if he has killed a Brāhmaṇa
woman who had bathed after her monthly course.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.2-6).—‘The murderer of a learned Brāhmaṇa shall
practise the following penance during twelve years:—Carrying a skull and
the foot of a bedstead, dressed in ass skin, staying in the forest;
making a skull his flag, he shall cause a hut to be built in the
cremation ground and reside there; going to seven houses to heg food,
while proclaiming his deed, he shall support life with whatever he gets
and shall fast if he obtains nothing. Or he may offer an *Āśvamedha*, a
*Gosava* or an *Agniṣṭut*; or he may bathe with the priests on the
completion of the *Āśvamedha*. They also quote the following:—“He who
unintentionally kills a Brāhmaṇa becomes sinful according to law; the
sages declare that he may be purified if he did it unintentionally. But
no expiation is possible for a wilful murderer.”

*Āpastamba* (1.24.11-22).—‘The Brāhmaṇa-slayer shall erect a hut in the
forest, restrain his speech, carry the skull like the flag and cover his
body from his navel to his knees with a quarter of a hempen cloth. The
path for him when he goes to the village is the space between the
tracks; and if he sees another *Ārya*, he shall step out of the road He
shall go to the village carrying a broken dish of metal of inferior
quality. He may go to seven houses only, crying—“Who will give alms to
the accursed?” That is how he should gain his livelihood. If he does not
obtain anything, he must fast. Whilst performing this penance, he should
tend cows. After having performed this penance for twelve years, he must
perform that customary ceremony which may gain for him re-admission into
society. Or, he may build a hut on the path of robbers and live there,
trying to recover from them the cows of Brāhmaṇas; and he becomes free
from his sin after he has been worsted by them thrice, or after he has
vanquished them.’

Do. (1.25.11).—‘A non-Brāhmaṇa who has killed a Brāhmaṇa shall go to the
battle-field and place himself between the two hostile armies; there
they shall kill him.’

Do. (1.28.21 and 1.29.1).—‘He who has killed a learned Brāhmaṇa shall
put on ass’ skin or dog’s skin with the hair turned outside and take up
a human skull as his drinking vessel; and he shall take the foot of a
bedstead instead of a staff, and proclaiming his deed, he shall go about
saying—“Who gives alms to the murderer of a *Bhrūṇa?*” Obtaining thus
his livelihood, he shall dwell in an empty house, or under a
tree,—having no intercourse with *Āryas*. Thus shall he live until his
last breath. After death his sin is taken off.’

*Viṣṇu* (35.6).—‘Those who have committed a “*Mahāpātaka*” are purified
by Āśvamedha and by visiting all *Tīrthas*.’

Do. (50.1-6, 15).—‘The man should make a hut of leaves in a forest and
live in it; he shall bathe three times a day: he shall collect alms,
going from one village to another, and proclaiming his own deed; he
shall sleep on the grass; this is called the *Mahāvrata*. He who has
killed a Brāhmaṇa must perform this for twelve years. One who is
performing this penance should carry the skull of the person slain, as
his flag.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.243-250).—‘One who has killed a Brāhmaṇa shall carry a
skull and a flag, shall live on alms, eating very little and proclaiming
his deed; living thus for twelve years he attains purity. Or he may
attain purity by saving the life of a Brāhmaṇa, or that of twelve cows;
as also by joining in the final bath of the *Āśvamedha* sacrifice. The
Brāhmaṇa-slayer may also become purified if he relieves the pain of a
long-suffering Brāhmaṇa, or relieves from danger a cow on the road. If
robbers have taken away a Brāhmaṇa’s entire property and the Brāhmaṇa
slayer recovers it from them, or if he is himself killed in the attempt,
or if he is even wounded in the attempt, he becomes purified. Or he may
offer his body into the fire beginning with the hairs and ending with
the marrow, indue order. Or he may attain purity by becoming killed in
battle;—he is purified even if he is mortally wounded but does not die.
Or he is purified by reciting the Vedic text thrice; eating very little
and going along the Sarasvatī river from its mouth towards its source.
Or he may attain purity by giving to a proper person a large amount of
wealth to his satisfaction.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.25-28).—‘The slayer of a Brāhmaṇa shall kindle a fire and
offer therein to Death the following eight oblations consisting of
portions of his own body—(l) hair, (2) skin, (3) blood, (4) flesh, (5)
sinews (6) fat, (7) bones, (8) marrow; (with appropriate mantras). Or he
shall fight for the sake of the King, or for the sake of Brāhmaṇas, and
die in battle facing the foe. It is declared in the Veda that “a
murderer who remains thrice unvanquished, or is thrice defeated in
battle, becomes pure.’”

*Parāśara* (8.42).—(Same as Manu, 80.)

*Mahābhārata* (12.335.4-11).—‘He shall eat only once, begging alms and
performing his duties; taking a begging bowl in his band, moving on
wooden sandals, celebate and ever alert; free from jealousy, sleeping on
the ground, proclaiming bis deed among people; living thus for twelve
years, the Brāhmaṇa-slayer becomes absolved (then follow Manu’s verses
74, 76, 77).

(See [Manu above,
9.317],
and
[1.93-95];
and below 12.112 in connection with 11.85 and 86.)
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अस्योपरिष्टाद् अत्रैव [प्र]करणे गुणविधिं वक्ष्यति- "कृतवापनो निवसेद् ग्रामान्ते गोव्रजे ऽपि वा" इत्य् एवमादि । **कृत्वा शवशिरोध्वजम्** इत्य् अत्र मुख्यं गृह्यते, गुणवृत्तेः कारणाभावात् । अवकीर्णप्रायश्चित्तगर्दभाजिनवत् शवशिरो मुख्यम् एव स्यात् । सुरापानप्रायस्चित्तवद् विचित्रा शास्त्रगतिः । न च वचनस्यातिभारो ऽस्ति । न चात्र न्यायगतिस् साध्वी शास्त्रलक्षणत्वाद् धर्माधर्मयोः ॥ ११.७१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

073	For his purification the slayer of a Brahmana shall make a hut in the forest and dwell (in it) during twelve years, subsisting on alms and making the skull of a dead man his flag.
</details>
