+++
title = "087 हत्वा गर्भम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having killed an unknown embryo, one should perform this same penance,—also on killing a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya, who has performed sacrifices, or a woman of the ‘Ātreyī’ race.—(87)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गर्भो** ब्राह्मणजातीय[^११७] एव । केन गर्भस्य पातनं कारयेत् । **अविज्ञातम्** अज्ञातस्त्रीपुरुषविशेषव्यञ्जनम् । उपज्ञाते यथायथं स्त्रीपुंसनिमित्तम् एव । 


[^११७]:
     M G: -jātīyatva

- <u>कथं</u> पुनः स्त्रियाम् अहतायां गर्भस्य वधो भवति । 

- <u>औषधादियोगेन</u> गर्भस्य पातनम् । 

- **एतद् एवेत्य्** एकवचनात् प्रत्यासन्नद्वादशवार्षिकम् एवातिदिश्यत इत्याहुः । 

<u>अन्ये</u> **एतद्** इति शुद्धिकारणं सामान्यापेक्षायाम्, अतः सर्वप्रायश्चित्तातिदेशः ।   

क्षत्रियवैश्यौ चेजानौ** यजमानौ । भूतकालता न विवक्षिता । स्मृत्यन्त्रे "सवनगतौ राजन्यवैश्यौ" (वध् २०.३४) इति । अतश् च प्रारब्धसोमपानयोर् एष विधिर् न दर्शपूर्णमासादियजमानयोः । लिङ्गदर्शनं तु यजमानमात्रयोर् भावयतीति । ब्राह्मणीभूयैव यजत इति ।


- **आत्रेयीं स्त्रियम्** अत्रिगोरजाताम् । जातेर् अविशेषात्[^११८] स्त्रीपुंसयोर् ब्राह्मणीनाम् अपि प्राप्ताव् आत्रेय्या वचनम् अन्यगोत्रनिवृत्त्यर्थम् । अतो ब्राह्मण्या अप्य् अन्यस्या वध उपपातकम् एव । "स्त्रीशूद्रविट्क्षत्रवधः"[^११९] (म्ध् ११.६५) इति । यत्[^१२०] तु "स्त्रीसुहृत्" (म्ध् ११.८८) इति, तच् चातुर्वर्ण्यस्त्रीमात्रे । अधमस्त्रीणाम् उपपातकमहापातकप्रायश्चित्ते विकल्प्येते[^१२१] । भर्तृस्वगुणापेक्षो विकल्पो बुद्धिपूर्वाबुद्धिपूर्वकृतश् च सः । स्तनपबालापत्ययोस् तदभावे बालानां दुःशके जीविते विजातियाया अपि, ब्राह्मणभार्याया भर्तृद्वेषाद् अनपराधिन्या निमित्तान्तरतो वोपजाप्यमानायाः शीलं रक्षन्त्या असंप्रयुज्यमानाया वधः । एवम् अप्य् उत्प्रेक्षया "स्त्रीसुहृद्वधम्" (म्ध् ११.८८) इत्यादेशात् । अन्यत्र तु स्त्रीशुद्रेति । आत्रेय्यां त्व् अविकल्पः । 


[^१२१]:
     M G: avamastrīṇām upapātakaṃ mahāpātakaprāyaścitte vikalpate


[^१२०]:
     M G: ye


[^११९]:
     M G: strīviṭkṣatriyavadhaḥ


[^११८]:
     M G: aviśeṣān na

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् **आत्रेयीं** गर्भसाहचर्याद् ऋतुमतीम् आहुः । पत्यते भ्रूणहात्रेयाश् च हन्तेति । भ्रूणहा ब्राह्मणवधकारी सा । सा च ब्राह्मण्य् एव । अत्र कुक्ष्याव् अवश्यं गर्भ उह्यत इत्य् आत्रेयी । यद्य् अपीदृश्यां वृत्तौ तद्धितो न स्मर्यते, प्रयोगानुसारेण तु भवतीति ॥ ११.८७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Embryo*’—belonging to the *Brāhmaṇa* caste.

The meaning of the verse is that one should not help an abortion.

‘*Unknown*’—whose male or female sex is not yet ascertainable. When this
has become ascertainable, the expiation shall be in accordance with the
sex.

“How can there be a killing of the *embryo*, until the woman is also
killed?”

Abortions are generally secured by the use of medicines and such other
methods.

‘*This same penance*.’—They say that, since the singular number is used
here, it is the ‘Twelve-year Penance’ that is meant here; specially as
this is what has been spoken of in closest proximity to the present
text.

Others, however, have held that the term ‘*this same*’ refers to the
means of purification in general; hence it stands for all the expiatory
rites that have been laid down in connection with ‘Brāhmaṇa-killing.’

‘*A Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya who has performed sacrifices*—*i.e*., who is
engaged in a sacrificial performance;—no significance attaching to the
past tense (in *ijānau*’); as in another *Smṛti* text we read—‘The
Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya seated at the Extraction of Soma’; from which it
would seem that the rule here laid down refers to the persons who have
started the drinking of Soma, and not to those engaged in the
performance of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices. But the clear
implication of the Vedic text is that it applies to persons engaged in
any sort of sacrificial performance;—the actual text being ‘it is only
when one has become a *Brāhmaṇa* that he engages *in a sacrifice*’
\[where no particular sacrifice is specified\].

‘A *woman qf the Ātreyī race*.’—Woman born in the race of Atri. The
caste of the man and the woman being the same, what is prescribed in
connection with the killing of ‘a Brāhmaṇa’ should apply equally to the
case of the male and the female; hence the mention of ‘the woman of the
Ātreyī race’ clearly excludes women of the other races; which means that
the killing of these other women of other Brāhmaṇa races, would be only
a ‘minor offence,’ mentioned above as ‘the killing of a woman of a
Vaiśya or a Kṣatriya’ (66). What has been spoken of as ‘the killing of a
woman or of a friend eta, eta,’ refers to women of all the four castes.
The upshot of all this is—that in the case of the killing of a Brāhmaṇa
woman, there are two optional alternatives—the expiation laid down for
‘heinous offences’ and that prescribed for a ‘minor offence’; which one
of the two is to be adopted bring determined by the qualifications of
the husband or of the woman herself,—as also by the intentional or
unintentional character of the crime. For instance, (*a*) even in the
case of a woman of another caste, if she has a child still at her
breast, the expiation shall be of the heavier kind, in consideration of
the fact, that it would be difficult for the child to live after the
mother’s death;—(*b*) in the case of the Brāhmaṇa woman who, faultless
herself, has become an object of hatred to her husband, and is killed by
a man because, on being approached by him, she preserves her chastity
and does not accede to his proposal,—the expiation shall be of the
heavier kind;—as also (*c*) in the case of recklessly killing a friend’s
wife. In other cases on the other hand, ordinary expiation according to
Verse 66 would be applicable In the case of the woman of the ‘*Ātreyī*’
race, however, there are no alternatives.

Others have explained the word ‘*Ātreyī*’ to mean a *woman in her
courses*, on the strength of its occurring along with the term
‘*embryo*.’ They quote the text —‘*pātyate bhrūṇahā, ātreyyāśca
hantā*’—where the term ‘*bhrūṇahā*’ means ‘the slayer of a Brāhmaṇa.’
Under this explanation also the *woman in her courses* referred to must
be a *Brāh* *maṇa*. She is called ‘*Ātreyi*’ in consideration of the
fact that she is sure to carry a child in her womb. Though the use of
the nominal affix found in the term ‘*Ātreyī*’ is nowhere laid down in
the sense here attributed to it, yet the said denotation may be accepted
on the strength of usage.—(87)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.251), according to which
‘*avijñāta garbha*’ indicates the stage of pregnancy before the sex of
the child has been determined;—it adds that though the fact of the child
in the womb belonging to the Brāhmaṇa-caste would make the offender
liable to the expiation for Brāhmaṇa-slaying,—yet, in as much as the
possibility of the child being female might lead one to think that the
guilt of killing a female would be a ‘minor sin,’ and hence involve a
lighter expiation,—it becomes necessary to emphasise the necessity of
performing the heavier expiation.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 87, 179 and 228), which adds
the explanation that, having killed the Brāhmaṇa embryo, *before its sex
has been determined*, one should perform the rites laid down in
connection with ‘Brāhmaṇa-murder,’ as also for killing a Kṣatriya or a
Vaiśya—while they are performing a sacrifice,—an d also for killing an
‘*ātreyī*,’ *i.e*., a Brāhmaṇī.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.87-88)  
**

*Gautama* (22.12-13).—‘The same penance that has been prescribed for
Brāhmaṇa-slaying shall be performed by one who has killed a Brāhmaṇa
female when she has bathed after her course; also for destroying the
embryo of a Brāhmaṇa, though its sex may be not distinguishable.’

*Bodhāyam* (2.1-12).—‘The penance for killing a woman who has bathed
after her courses is the same as that for the killing of a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Āpastamba* (1.24.8-9).—‘He who has destroyed an embryo of a Brāhmaṇa,
or a woman during her courses, is called *Abhiśasta*, accursed, and
stands on the same footing regarding expiation, as the Brāhmaṇa-killer.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.23, 34-35).—‘He is called *Bhrūṇahan* who kills a
Brāhmaṇa or destroys an embryo the sex of which is unknown. For killing
a female of the Brāhmaṇa caste who is an *Ātreyī*...... the same penance
that is prescribed for the Brāhmaṇa-killer should be performed. That
woman is called *Ātreyī* who has bathed after her courses.’

*Viṣṇu* (50.8-10).—‘He who has killed a pregnant woman, or a woman in
her courses, or a woman who has bathed after her courses, or a friend,
shall perform the *Mahāvrata*.’ (p. 839)

*Yājñavalkya* (3.251).—‘He who destroys an embryo or an *Ātreyī* woman
should perform the penance laid down for the Brāhmaṇa-killer.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ब्रह्महत्याप्रायश्चित्तातिदेशो ऽयं गर्भादिहन्तॄणाम् । गर्भश् च ब्राह्मणगर्भ एव प्रकरणाद् विज्ञेयः । **आत्रेयी** तु रजस्वला ब्राह्मण्य् एव । तस्यां हि कदाचित् पुंसस् संभव इति, अतस् तां हत्वा ब्रह्महा भवति । गोत्रत इत्य् अपर आत्रेयीम् आहुः, यस्माच् चात्रेयीं हत्वा ब्रह्महा भवति, ततो ऽन्यां ब्राह्मणीं हत्वा न ब्रह्महेति गम्यते । गवादिषु तु जातिमात्रस्य विवक्षितत्वात् स्त्रियां पुंसि चाविशेषेण प्रायश्चित्तम् । यच् चोपरिष्टश्लोके वक्ष्यति, "कृत्वा च स्त्रीसुहृद्वधम्" इति, स्त्रीग्रहणं तद् अपि ब्रह्मण्या एव । गोवधादौ च स्त्रीग्रहणस्य विद्यमानत्वाद् विकल्पेन ब्राह्मण्याम् इदं प्रायश्चित्तं स्यात् । विकल्पश् च गुणापेक्षो युक्तः, गुरुलघुप्रायश्चित्तयोः प्रत्ययाप्रत्ययकारणेन वा । एवं चात्रेयीग्रहणम् अर्थवद् भवति । सवनगतौ राजन्यवैस्यौ हत्वैतद् एव । तथा च ब्राह्मणम्, "यो वै कश्चिद् यजते ब्राह्मणिभूयैव यजते" इति ॥ ११.८६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

088	For destroying the embryo (of a Brahmana, the sex of which was) unknown, for slaying a Kshatriya or a Vaisya who are (engaged in or) have offered a (Vedic) sacrifice, or a (Brahmana) woman who has bathed after temporary uncleanness (Atreyi), he must perform the same penance,
</details>
