+++
title = "094 गौडी पैष्टी"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Wine should be understood to be of three kinds: (a) distilled from molasses (Gauḍī), (b) distilled from grains (Paiṣṭī), and (c) ‘distilled from grapes’ (Mādhvī); as the one so all the rest should never be drunk by the chief of the twice-born.—(94)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गुडविकारो **गौडी** । येषाम् अपीक्षुरसम् एव मद्यताम् आपद्यते तेषाम् अपि कारणे कार्योपचारेण **गौडी**व्यपदेशो न विरुद्धः । मधुनो विकारो **माध्वी** । मधु माध्वीकं विकारवृत्त्या । न सदो जातस्य मृद्वीविकारस्य[^१२५] प्रतिषेधो यावन् मद्यावस्थाम् अप्राप्तस्येति[^१२६] दर्शयति । अविकृतं हि मधुमाध्वीकम् इच्छन्तीति स्मरति । यत्रापि मद्यशब्देन प्रतिषेधस् तत्राप्य् अनासादितमद्यपानशक्तियोगस्य नैव प्रतिषेधः, तस्य मद्यशब्देनानभिधानात् । यथा शुक्तशब्दो ऽवस्थाविशेषवति प्रवर्तते नाविशेषेण । न हि तद् एवाम्लताम् अनापन्नं शुक्तम् इत्य् उच्यते । यथा स एव गौः वत्सावस्थायां न बलीवर्दः । एवं च[^१२७] पिष्टोदकादिसंघातसंमृष्ट्या[^१२८] न सुरा यावत् कालपरिवासेन[^१२९] न मदशक्तिम् आपन्ना । एवम् इक्षुरसमृद्वीविकारयोर् द्रष्टव्यम् । 


[^१२९]:
     M G: -vāse


[^१२८]:
     M G: -saṃmṛśyā; J: -saṃmaṣṭyā (my reading is conjectural)


[^१२७]:
     M G: evaṃ kiṃ ca


[^१२६]:
     M G: aprāpta iti


[^१२५]:
     J: mṛdvīkārasya

- <u>अल्पायास्</u> तर्हि पानं प्राप्नोति, यावत्या मात्रया पीता न मदयति । प्रतिबन्धकद्रव्ययोगेन च ।

- <u>नैष</u> दोषः ।  नायं मदोत्पत्तिप्रतिषेधः- "तथा कर्तव्यं यथा मत्तः क्षीबो न भवति" इति । किं तर्हि "यन् मदजननसमर्थशक्तियुक्तं तन् न पातव्यम्" इति । अल्पाया अपि सा शक्तिर् विद्यते । यावता रूक्षम् अल्पप्राणं स्वल्पम् अपि मद्यं मदयति, स्निग्धं महाप्राणं बह्व् अपि नेति । नैतावता मदशक्त्यभावः शक्यो वक्तुम् । कार्याभावेन कारणभावान् मद्यानाम् अपि नैव निश्चीयते । न हि महत्काष्ठं दग्धुम् असमर्थस्याग्नेर् अदाहकत्वम् अनुमीयते, शुष्कतृणे[^१३०] तादृशस्यैव दाहकत्वोपलम्भात् । 


[^१३०]:
     M G: śuṣkatṛṇena

- <u>यद् अप्य्</u> उक्तं द्रव्यान्तरेण शक्तिप्रतिबन्धकत्वे[^१३१] पानप्राप्तिर् इति ।


[^१३१]:
     M G: -bandhakatva-

- <u>तद् अप्य्</u> अचोद्यम् । न हि तृणेन तादृशस्यैव दाहे ददानीं सा तस्य शक्तिर् नास्ति किं तु विद्यमानापि कार्यारम्भं प्रत्य् असमर्था । शक्तिसंभवश् च प्रतिहेतुर् न ते नित्यकार्यम् । न च द्रव्यान्तराणि[^१३२] शक्तिं विनाशयन्ति, अपि तु कार्यारम्भं प्रतिबध्नन्ति । तथा च तत्परिमाणारम्भकद्रव्ययोगे ऽपि पैत्तिको माद्यति न श्लैष्मिको ऽतो ऽनुमीयते न तस्य विनाशः । 


[^१३२]:
     M G: taddravyāntarāṇi

- तस्मान् न भाविमद्यावस्थस्य प्रतिषेधो नापि प्राप्तावस्थाविशेषस्य प्रतिबन्धकाभावादिवत् तत्प्रतिषेधः । यथा चौरः स वर्जनीय इति । नोदश्वितो ऽप्राप्ताम्लभावस्य प्रतिषेधः । 

- माध्वीति कथं यावता गुणेन माधवीति (?) भवितव्यम् ।

- "संज्ञापूर्वको विधिर् अनित्यः" (च्ड़्। प्भ् ९३) इति परिहारः । ज्ञापकं चास्याः परिभाषाया आरोद्[^१३३] इति वक्तव्ये "ओर् गुण"[^१३४] (पाण् ६.४.१४६) इति गुणग्रहणम् । 


[^१३४]:
     M G: tadguṇa


[^१३३]:
     M G: guror

- अत्र द्विजोत्तमग्रहणं च क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् मद्यानुज्ञानार्थम् । तथा च महाभारते भारतानां यादवानां मद्यपानं तु वर्ण्यते- "उभौ मध्वासवक्षीबौ[^१३५] दृष्टौ मे केशवार्जुनौ" (म्भ् ५.५८.५) इत्य् उत्तरश्लोकाद् अर्थवाद एव । 


[^१३५]:
     M G: madhvāsavau kṣībau

- <u>ननु</u> च तथा **सर्वा** इति बहुवचनं कथम् ।

- <u>यावता</u> एकम् उपमानं द्वे उपमेये ।

- अन्नमलत्वं चात्र हेतुमन् निगदो ऽर्थवदो मलं हेतुर् यथा शूर्पेण जुहोति तेन ह्य् अन्नं क्रियत इति ॥ ११.९४ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Gauḍī*’ is that which is distilled from ‘*Guḍa*,’ molasses. Even
according to those persons who make wine directly from fermented
cane-juice itself, the article distilled is ‘*Gauḍī*’ ‘distilled from
*guḍa*,’ in the sense that the name of the *product*, (*guḍa*, molasses)
is applied to the cause (cane-juice).

The ‘*Mādhvī*’ is that ‘distilled from *madhu*, *grape-juice* i.e., in
its fermented form’; for fresh grape-juice, before it has become
fermented into wine, is not forbidden. This distinctly lays down that it
is the *fermented* grape-juice that is called ‘*Mādhvī*.’ Wherever the
prohibition contains the word ‘*madya*’ (‘intoxicating substance’), it
cannot apply to any substance which has not acquired intoxicating
properties; us such a substance could not be spoken of as ‘*madya*,’
intoxicating substance. A similar case is that of the word ‘*Śukta*’
(‘fermented gruel’) which is applied to the gruel in a certain
condition, and not to gruel in general. So long as the gruel has not
become soured, it is not called ‘*Śukta*.’ In the same manner again, the
calf is not called a ‘bull’ while it is young.

Thus it is that the mixture of grain water and other things does not
come to be called ‘wine,’ so long as it does not imbibe intoxicating
properties, by being kept over night Similarly with cane-juice,
grape-juice and other substances.

“From all this it would follow that the drinking of a small quantity of
wine is permitted—that quantity of it which, if drunk, does not cause
intoxication, or when this is prevented by the use of an antidote.”

There is no force in this objection. The prohibition is not meant to
apply to the bringing about of intoxication; it does not mean, for
instance, that ‘one should act so that he does not become intoxicated or
drunk’; what the prohibition means is that ‘one should not drink that
which possesses the capacity to cause intoxication’; and this capacity
is present in a small quantity of wine also. The mere fact that while
dry and low-spirited wine inebriates even when drunk in small
quantities, that which is soft and high-spirited does not do so even
when drunk in large quantities,—does not prove that there is no
intoxicating power in the latter. Mere absence of effects does not
necessarily prove the absence of the causa For instance, because a
certain quantity of fire is unable to burn a large piece of wood, that
does not prove that the fire does not possess the power to burn;
specially when it is found that it is quite capable of burning dry
grass.

It has been argued that—“it would seem that the drinking of wine is
permitted if its intoxicating properties are counteracted by an
antidote.”

But there is no force in this objection either. For even though the fire
may not burn a heap of grass when it is wet, it does not mean that it
does not possess the power to burn; all that it indicates is that though
the power is there, it is unable to produce its effect But so long as
the power is there, the chance of the effect being produced is always
there.

Then again, no other substance could deprive the wine of its inherent
power of intoxicating; all that it can do is to prevent the effects from
appearing. Thus it is that a man of bilious temperament becomes
intoxicated by the use of even a small quantity of wine, another man of
phlegmatic temperament is not so easily intoxicated. From all this it is
clear that the power is not destroyed in either case.

Thus then the prohibition cannot apply to the substance which is yet to
acquire the intoxicating power. Nor can it be regarded as forbidden
simply because there is prohibition of it as possessing certain definite
characteristics. For instance, in the case of the assertion—‘the thief
should be avoided’ (it is not meant that every man, even before he has
committed theft, shall be avoided). It is for this reason that no
prohibition applies to the gruel before it has become sour.

“How do you explain the form ‘*Mādhvī*’? The correct form should be
‘*Mādhavī*.’”

The answer to this is that rules as applied to proper names are not
compulsory (*Paribhāṣā*, 95); and the authority for this consists of
Pāṇini’s Sūtra 3.4.146.

The use of the term ‘*chief of the twice-born*’ has been used with a
view to permit wine-drinking for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya. For
instance, the Mahābhārata describes wine as drunk by the Yadāvas and the
Bhāratas:—‘Both Keśava and Arjuna were found by me to be drunk with
wine,’—which is a declamatory assertion pointing to the same fact “Why
is then the plural form in ‘*so all*?’”

Two of them are the substances *likened* and one is that to which those
are likened.

The mention of wine being the ‘dirty refuse of grains’ is meant to be a
declamatory assertion producing a reason for what has been prescribed;
just as in the case of the text ‘*Śūrpeṇa juhoti tena hi annam
kriyate*.’—(94)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Madhvī*.’—distilled from honey’ (Medhātithi);—‘distilled from Madhūka
flowers’ (Kullūka);—‘distilled either from grapes and from Madhūka
flowers or from honey’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1044), which adds that the liquor
distilled from grains is here made an example of prohibited drink; which
means that this is the principal kind of liquor, and the other two are
only secondary; it is for this reason that though all the three are
equally forbidden for the Brāhmaṇa, the former alone is forbidden for
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.253), to the effect that liquor distilled
from grains is the principal kind of liquor;—and again, in the sense
that the sin involved in the drinking of liquor distilled from honey and
molasses is as heavy as that in drinking that distilled from grains.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 411), which notes
that the name ‘*Surā*’ is applied primarily to liquor distilled from
grains only, and only indirectly to those distilled from honey and
molasses;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 548);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
814), which notes that ‘*dvijottama*’ stands for Brāhmaṇas; hence the
meaning is that all kinds of liquor are forbidden for the Brāhmaṇa from
his very birth;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 89) in support of the view
that the name ‘*Surā*’ applies to wines of all the three kinds;—and in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 355) to the effect that the name ‘*Surā*’ applies
directly to these three kinds of wine only, and only figuratively to
other kinds.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.94-97)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (22.82).—‘Distilled from sugar, or from the blossoms of
*Madhūka*, or from flour; these three kinds of wine have to be
discerned; as the one so all; none of them should be tasted by the
twice-born. Further, that distilled from the blossoms of the *Madhūka*,
from molasses, from the *Ṭaṅka* fruit, from the Jujube fruit, from
dates, from the bread-fruit, from honey, *Maireya* wine, and wine made
of the sap of the cocoanut (coconut?) tree; these ten intoxicating
drinks are unclean for the Brāhmaṇa; but the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya
commit no wrong in touching or drinking them.’

*Agastya* (Aparārka, p. 1070).—‘That distilled from the jack-fruit, from
grapes, from *Madhūka* blossoms, from dates, from palm-fruit, from
sugar-cane juice, from honey, the *Maira*, from the cocoanut,—these
eleven kinds of wine are equal; the twelfth is the wine called *Surā*,
which is the worst of all.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

गुडस्य विकारो **गौडी**, गुडकार्या वा । अनुक्ता तद्धितवृत्तिर् इति कृत्वा यत्रापीक्षुरसविकारो मद्यं तत्रापीक्षुरसो गुडकारणत्वाद् गुदशब्देनोच्यते । एवं चोभयथापि गौडी भवति । **पैष्टी** तु पिष्टविकारः, "तस्येदम्" इति वा । अनुक्ता तद्धितवृत्तिर् इति पूर्वोक्ता मुख्या । **माध्वी** च मधुशब्दादेर् अत्र विकारार्थे । एवं मधुविकारो माध्वी न माधवी, येन "संज्ञापूर्व[को] विधिर् नित्यः" इतीयं परिभाषा अस्याश् च ज्ञापकं स्यात् । "ओर् ओद् इति वक्तव्ये" गुणग्रहणं गुर्वविकृतं ज्ञापनार्थम् अस्य । तथा च सति गुणस्यानित्यत्वात् माद्वीति सिद्धम् । एवं च "स्वायम्भुव इत्य् एतद् अपि सिद्धम्" भवति । एवं त्रिविधैषा । **यथैवैका** इति च प्रसिद्धा । प्रतिषिद्धायां पिष्टसुरायां पूर्वश्लोके,इह श्लोके इतरे गौडीमाध्व्याव् असुरे सत्यौ सुरीकरोति निन्दार्थम् । अतः पिष्टसुरासमे इतरे न सुरे एव । यथा राजसमो मन्त्री राजाभवति । **यथैवैका तथा सर्वा न पातव्या द्विजोत्तमैर्** इति गौडीमाध्व्योश् च बहुवचनम्, **तथा सर्व** इत्य् एतद्भेदबहुत्वापेक्षम्, समुदायापेक्षं वा । ते च पैष्टी च सर्वापेया । इतरथा हि "यथैवैका तथैवोभौ न पातव्यौ द्विजोत्तमैः" इत्य् एवं पाठः स्यात्, यद्य् एवं बहुवचनम् इदं न व्याख्यायेत । एवं चात्र श्लोके ब्राह्मणानां गौडीमाध्व्योः प्रतिषेधः, पूर्वश्लोके तु मुख्यसुरा त्रयाणाम् अपि प्रतिषिद्धा । एतच् च सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते । सामर्थ्यं च वाक्यद्वयारम्भः । तद् यतः श्लोके ऽस्मिंस् त्रयाणां द्विजानां प्रतिषिद्ध्येरन् ततः पूर्वश्लोकारम्भो ऽनर्थकः स्यात् । आरब्धस् तु यतः पुनरुक्तत्वात् शास्त्रवाक्ययोः पूर्वश्लोकेन मुख्यसुरा त्रयाणाम् अपि प्रतिषिद्धा, उत्तरश्लोके तु गौडीमाध्वयोर् एव ब्राह्मणानां प्रतिषेधः । एवं च सति **यथैवैका तथा सर्वा** इत्य् एतद् उपपन्नं भवति । **द्विजोत्तम**ग्रहणं चात्र ये च "द्विजातिभिः" इत्य् अत्र पठन्ति, तेषां द्विजातिशब्दाद् द्विजोत्तमार्थ एव विज्ञेयः, त्रयाणां साधारणो ऽपि सन्न् एतत् स्यात् सार्थ्यात् । तथा चोत्तरशोकेषु त्रिषु ब्राःमणग्रहणानि लिङ्गान्य् अस्यैवार्थस्य प्रदर्शयिष्यामः ॥ ११। ९३ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

095	Sura one must know to be of three kinds, that distilled from molasses (gaudi), that distilled from ground rice, and that distilled from Madhuka-flowers (madhvi); as the one (named above) even so are all (three sorts) forbidden to the chief of the twice-born.
</details>
