+++
title = "100 गृहीत्वा मुसलम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Taking up a club, the King himself shall strike him once. The thief becomes purified by death; but the Brāhmaṇa by penance alone.—(100)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मुशलं** दण्डविशेष आयसो दारुमयो वा । **सकृत् स्वयम्** इति विवक्षितम् । **वधेन शुध्यति** । सकृत् प्रहारेण वधो मरणफलो वा भवतु मा वास्तु । तादृशेन मुशलप्रहारेण शुद्धो भवति । **ब्राह्मणस् तु तपसा** वक्ष्यमाणेन । अत्रापि ब्राह्मणग्रहणम् अविवक्षितम् । तथा चोत्तरत्र द्विजग्रहणम् । यद्य् अपि च कृष्णलग्रहणे महापातकं तथापि मरणान्तं प्रायश्चित्तं सुवर्णशतहरणे द्रष्टव्यम् । उक्तं दण्डप्रायश्चित्तं तुल्यरूपेण । अत्र चोक्तम् "शताद् अब्यधिके वधः" (म्ध् ८.३२१) इत्य् अतो ऽर्वाक् कल्पना कार्या । 

- यस् तु "मरणात् पूतो भवति" (वध् २०.४१) इति प्रायश्चित्तान्तरम्, "तस्मिन् राजा शस्त्रम् उदुम्बरम् आदद्यात् तस्मात् तं प्रमापयेन् मरणात् पूतो भवतीति विज्ञायते" (वध् २०.४१) । यदा क्षत्रियादिर् हन्ता स्वामी च गुणवांस् तत्रैतद् विज्ञायते । यदा तु मरणोद्यतस् तदा[^१३७] स्याद् इति, प्रयोजने प्रयोजनोपहारस्[^१३८] तदा वा शिष्टं निष्कालको[^१३९] घृताक्तो गोमयादिना पातप्रभृतिः[^१४०] ॥ ११.१०० ॥


[^१४०]:
     J: yā prakṛtiḥ (the reading of this sentence is corrupt)


[^१३९]:
     J: niṣkān ko


[^१३८]:
     M G: prayojanāpahāras


[^१३७]:
     J: dātum udyuktaṃ yadā
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Club*’—a particular kind of stick, made of iron or wood.

‘Once,’ ‘*himself*’—both of these are meant to be emphasised.

‘*Becomes purified by death*.’—The man shall be struck only; it does not
matter whether or not he dies by it; he becomes purified by the stroke
of the club.

‘*The Brāhmaṇa by penance*’—as described below. Here also stress is not
meant to be laid upon the term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*.’ It is for this reason that
the next verse contains the term ‘*twice-born person*’ (in general).

Though the stealing of *Kṛṣṇala* (grains of gold, used at certain
sacrifices) is a serious crime, yet, what is here laid down should be
understood as pertaining to the stealing of a hundred gold-pieces. It
has been explained that *punishment* and *expiation* proceed on the same
lines; and, in connection with punishments, it has been said that
‘*death* shall be the penalty when *more than a hundred* gold-pieces
have been stolen’ (8.321); hence the expiation here put forward should
also be taken as pertaining to the stealing of the same quantity.

As regards the assertion that the thief becomes pure by death, it is
understood to be based upon the passage—‘For him the King shall take up
a weapon made of Udumbara wood, and kill him with it, and he becomes
pure by that death.’ And this refers to a case where the stealer is a
Kṣatriya or one lower still, and the owner is a highly qualified person.

When, however, the man is prepared to die, he may be made to refund what
he has stolen and smeared with butter, live upon cow-dung (?).—(100)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Tapasaiva tu*.’—“Kullūka thinks that it indicates that, while a
Brāhmaṇa must never be slain by the king, other Āryans also may perform
austerities.—According to Rāghavānanda it refers to the optional
recitation of the *Gāyatri* 700,000 times;—according to Nārāyaṇa to
other penances, even such as end in death;—Govindarāja takes it as
referring to those prescribed in the next verse.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 414), which
adds the following notes:—The alternative of ‘killing’ is meant for one
who is a Brāhmaṇa in name only while ‘austerity’ is for one who is
endowed with such qualities as being devoted to sacrifices and so forth.
It goes on to add that the death-penalty is meant for cases of
intentional stealing; *unintentional* stealing of gold being possible in
cases where a man steals a piece of cloth, to which (unknown to him) a
piece of gold may be tied. It adds that the particular ‘austerity’ is,
meant as described by Manu himself in the next verse.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1079), which adds that the term
‘*vipraḥ*’ does not preclude the other castes; it is emphasised only
with a view to indicate that what is here stated is an exception to the
general prohibition ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not he killed this general
prohibition is of that act of killing to which one is prompted by mere
passion; in the case in question the killing is done as an act of
justice, and at the request of the culprit himself. In fact the omission
of this act of justice would involve the king in sin.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.267), which adds the following note—On
being struck once, if the culprit dies, he becomes absolved from his
sin; but even if he do not die when struck, he becomes absolved from the
sin;—and again, to the effect that, the killing of the Brāhmaṇa under
the said circumstances is permissible;—and in *Prayaścittaviveka* (p.
117).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.99-102)  
**

[\[See above
8.314-316.\]]

See Comparative notes for [Verse
11.99].
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

101	Taking (from him) the club (which he must carry), the king himself shall strike him once, by his death the thief becomes pure; or a Brahmana (may purify himself) by austerities.
</details>
