+++
title = "103 गुरुतल्प्य् अभिभाष्यैनस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who has violated his Preceptor’s bed shall confess his crime and lie down upon a heated iron-bed; or embrace a blazing image. By death he becomes purified.—(103)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गुरुतल्प**गः । "गुरुतल्पी" इति वा पाठः । तल्पीति मत्वर्थीयेन विशिष्ट एव स्त्रीपुंसयोः संसर्ग उच्यते । **गुरुर्** आचार्यः पिता चेति । **तल्प**शब्दो दारवचनः । आचार्याणी गत्वेदं प्रायश्चित्तम् । अपरा मातेव मातासमानजातीयायां गमने[^१४३] । इमानि त्रीणि प्रायश्चित्तानि कल्प्यते[^१४४] बुद्धिपूर्वं च । **अभिभाषैनः** पापं विख्याप्य । **तल्पे**[^१४५] शयने ऽग्निस्पर्शे **ऽयोमये** शयीत, **मृत्युना शुध्यतीति** वचनात् । **सूर्मिः**[^१४६] तप्ता स्त्रीप्रकृतिर् अयोमयी, ताम् **आश्लिष्येद्** आलिङ्ग्येत् ॥ ११.१०३ ॥


[^१४६]:
     M G omit: sūrmiḥ


[^१४५]:
     M G: tapte


[^१४४]:
     M G: kalpate


[^१४३]:
     M G: mātaiva samānajātīyāgamana
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He who has violated his preceptor’s bed*’—Another reading his
‘*Gurutalpī*’;—the term ‘*talpī*’ ending in the possessive affix, stands
for a particular form of intercourse between man and woman.

By ‘*preceptor*,’ here is meant the Preceptor as well as the Father. And
‘*bed*’ stands for the *wife*.

The expiation here laid down is for intercourse with the wife of one’s
preceptor, or with a step-mother of the same caste; and the three
expiations here set forth refer to a case where the act has been
intentional.

‘*Confess his guilt*’— proclaim his crime.

He shall lie down upon a bed of iron as hot as fire; that this is what
is meant is dear by the next sentence—‘*He becomes purified by death*.’

‘*Sūrmi*’ is image of a woman, made of iron. This he shall
embrace.—(103)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 1083), which adds the following
notes:—The culprit should openly proclaim his offence of having violated
his Guru’s bed;—‘*sūrmī*’ is a female image made of iron or some such
metal.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 255);—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 836 and 837), which notes that there are two
expiations prescribed here:—(*a*) lying down upon a heated iron-bed, and
(*b*) embracing the red hot image;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Prāyaścitta 11
*a*);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 137), which explains ‘*gurutalpaḥ*’
(which is its reading for ‘*gurutalpī*’) as ‘*guroḥ talpam talpam
yasya*,’ ‘*sūrmī*’ as an iron image.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.103-107)  
**

*Gautama* (23.8-11).—‘He who has defiled his *Guru’s* bed shall lay
himself down on a heated iron-bed; or he shall embrace the red-hot
iron-image of a woman; or he shall tear out his organ and testicles and,
holding them in his hands, walk straight towards the south-west, until
he falls down dead. He will be purified after death.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.13-15).—‘He who has defiled his Guru’s bed shall lay
himself down on a heated iron bed;—or embrace the red-hot image of a
woman;—or cutting off his organ together with the testicles, and holding
them in his joined hands, he shall walk towards the south-west until he
falls down dead.’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.1-2).—‘He who has had connection with his *Guru’s*
wife shall cut off his organ together with the testicles, take them in
his joined hands and walk towards the south until he falls down dead. Or
he may die embracing a heated metal-image of a woman.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (22.13-14).—‘He who violates his *Guru’s* bed shall, cut off
his organ together with the testicles, take them in his joined hands and
walk towards the south; whenever he meets with an obstacle, there he
shall stand until he dies;—or having shaved all his hair and smeared his
body with clarified butter, he shall embrace the heated iron-image of a
woman. It is declared in the Veda that he is purified after death.’

*Viṣṇu* (34.1, 2;—53.1).—‘Sexual connection with one’s mother or
daughter or daughter-in-law is crime of the highest degree. Such
criminals of the highest degree should enter the flames; there is no
other way to atone for the crime. One who has had illicit sexual
intercourse must perform the *Prājāpatya* penance for one year according
to the rule of the *Mahāvrata*.’ (P. 839)

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.50-51).—(Same as Manu.)

*Yājñavalkya* (3.259-260).—‘The violator of his *Guru’s* bed should he
down on a heated iron-bed along with the iron-image of a woman; or
cutting out his testicles and holding them he shall give up his body
towards the south; or he shall perform the *Prājāpatya* penance for one
year, or the *Cāndrāyaṇa* for three months, and shall repeat the Vedic
text.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

104	He who has violated his Guru's bed, shall, after confessing his crime, extend himself on a heated iron bed, or embrace the red-hot image (of a woman); by dying he becomes pure;
</details>
