+++
title = "108 उपपातकसंयुक्तो गोघ्नो"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The cow-killer, charged with a minor offence, shall drink barley for three months; and having shaved his head and covered with the skin of the cow, he shall live in the cow-pen.—(108)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गोघ्नो** गोघाती, "मूलविभुजादिदर्शनात् कः" (कात् २ ओन् पाण् ३.२.५) ।

- **यवान् पिबेद्** इति यवसक्तुपानं <u>केचिद् आहुः</u> । 

- <u>अन्ये तु</u> प्रकृतिशब्दः कार्ये[^१५४] यवाग्वां प्रयुक्तो ऽतो यवान् पिष्ट्वा पाययेद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । 


[^१५४]:
     M G: kāryo

- पूर्वस्मिन् पक्षे ऽश्रुतोदकादिद्रवकल्पना भवति । न हि यवा उदकादिना विना पातुं शक्यन्ते । इह तु लक्षणमात्रम्, अश्रुतकल्पनायाश् च लघ्वी लक्षणा ।

- **कृतवपनः** कृतमौण्ड्यः, केशच्छेदवचनो वा । **गोष्ठे** यत्र गाव आसते । **चर्मणा** **तेन** । या न[^१५५] गौर् हता, अपि त्व् अन्यस्या अपि ॥ ११.१०८ ॥


[^१५५]:
     M G: yena
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Cow-killer*’—one who has killed a cow; the word being formed with the
‘*Ka*’ affix.

‘*Shall drink barley*.’—Some people explain this to mean a drink mixed
with barley. Others, however, hold that the name of the original
substance (barley) has been used in the sense of its product; hence what
is meant is that the man shall drink *barley-gruel*.

In the ease of the former explanation, it is necessary to assume the
addition of water or some liquid substance, without its being mentioned
in the text; as mere barley-grains cannot be drunk, until they are mixed
up with a liquid substance.

In the second explanation, however, all that is necessary is to take the
word ‘barley’ in a figurative sense; and certainly, a figurative or
indirect signification is much simpler than the assumption of what is
not mentioned at all.

‘*Having shaved his head*’—with his hair shaved off; or it may simply
mean *with his hairs cut*.

‘*Cow-pen*’—the place where cows sit and rest.

‘*Covered with the skin of the cow*’—not necessarily of the cow that has
been killed; it may be of another cow also.—(108)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 11.108-116)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 191),
which adds that this refers to the ease of intentionally killing a cow
belonging to a Brāhmaṇa;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 860), which notes that
what is laid down in verses 108 to 113 refers to cases of intentional
killing of a cow belonging to the Kṣatriya, and what is declared in
verses 115 and 116 to cases of killing any cow belonging to a Brāhmaṇa.
It goes on to add the following notes:—Since the text mentions no other
food, the man should live upon fruits and roots only; or the meaning may
be that ‘*anena vidhinā*’ (of verse 115) refers to the two months’
course detailed in the foregoing verses; and the sense is that the man
who is unable to give ten cows with a bull should give away all his
belongings. When however one unintentionally kills a cow, young and
well-fed, belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, he should observe the *three-monthly*
penance prescribed by Aṅgiras.

They are quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 519);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p.
358);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 196-197), which says that this
refers to the ordinary killing of the cow, and *not* to its killing for
sacrifices;—and adds the following explanation:—He should shave his
head, cover himself with the skin of the cow he has killed, and drink
gruel of barley cooked in cow’s urine’, and thus live in the cow-pen,
for one month, and during the next two months he should fast during the
day and eat a little in the evening,—‘*vīrāsana*’ is sitting without any
support,—‘*abhiśasta*’ attacked,—‘*bhayaih*’ by dangerous
animals,—‘*sarvaprāṇaiḥ*’ (which is its reading for *sarvapāpaiḥ*’), to
the best of his power—‘*gām na kathayet*’, with a view to have her
driven away,—‘*sucaritavrataḥ*’, he who has followed these restrictions
in the right manner,—he should give ten cows along with one bull.

Verse 115 only is quoted in the *Śuddhikaumdī* (p.241).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.108-116)  
**

*Gautama* (22.18).—‘The penance for killing a cow is the same as that
for killing a Vaiśya (vow of continence to be kept for three years and
giving one cow and one bull).’

*Āpastamba* (1.26, 1).—‘If a milch cow or a full-grown ox has been
killed without reason, the expiation shall be the same as that for
killing a Śūdra (give ten cows with a bull).’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.18).—‘If he kills a cow, he shall perform, during six
months, a *Kṛcchra* or a *Taptakṛcchra*, clothed in the raw hide of that
cow.’

*Viṣṇu* (50, 16-24).—‘The man shall serve cows for a month, his hair and
beard having been shaven;—he shall sit down to rest when they rest; and
stand still when they stand still;—he shall give assistance to a cow
that has met with an accident;—and shall preserve cows from dangers;—he
shall not shelter himself against cold and similar dangers, without
having previously protected the cows against them;—he shall wash himself
with cow’s urine; and subsist upon the five bovine products;—this is the
*Go-vrata*, cow-penance, which must be performed by one who has killed a
cow.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.264-265).—‘The man who has killed a cow shall drink the
five bovine products for a month, sleeping in the cowpen, serving the
cows; and then by giving a cow, he becomes pure; or he shall calmly
perform the penance of *Prājāpatya Atikṛcchra*;—or having fasted for
three days, he shall give away ten cows with a hull as the eleventh.’

*Parāśara* (8.31-42).—‘Having shaved the whole head, he shall bathe
three times during the day, and live among cows during the night, and go
behind them during the day; when it is hot, or raining, or very cold or
when the wind is blowing strongly, he shall not protect himself until he
has protected the cows to the best of his ability. If he finds a cow
grazing in a field or in a threshing yarn—either his own or belonging to
some one else,—he shall not tell of it to any one; nor shall he tell any
one when he finds a calf sucking milk. He shall drink water when the
cows drink it, he down when they he down, and with all his strength
shall save a cow when she has either fallen down or stuck in mud. One
shall prescribe as penance for cow-killing a suitable *Prājāpatya* and
*Kṛcchra*: (Forms of these penances)—For one day he shall eat once; for
one day he shall eat only in the evening; for one day he shall eat only
what he gets without asking for it; and for one day he shall live on
air; for two days he shall eat only once; for two days he shall eat what
he gets without asking for it, for two days he shall eat only at night;
for two days he shall live on air. Each of these being done for three
days; and for four days. The prescribed penance having been performed,
he shall feed Brāhmaṇas, present them with fees and recite the sacred
texts. After feeding the Brāhmaṇas, the cow-killer becomes purified
without doubt.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

109	He who has committed a minor offence by slaying a cow (or bull) shall drink during (the first) month (a decoction of) barley-grains; having shaved all his hair, and covering himself with the hide (of the slain cow), he must live in a cow-house.
</details>
