+++
title = "118 अवकीर्णी तु"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The immoral religious student shall offer, at night, to Nirṛti, on the crossway, a one-eyed ass, in the manner of the ‘Pākayajña.’—(118)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अवकारो ऽवकीर्णो ब्रह्मचारिणो व्रतानि तस्यातिक्रमः[^१७२] स्त्रीसंप्रयोगलक्षणः सो ऽस्यास्तीत्य् **अवकीर्णी** । वक्ष्यति "कामतो रेतसः सेकम्" (म्ध् ११.१२०) इति । **काणेन गर्दभेनेति** सगुणद्रव्यनिर्देशः, **चतुष्पथेनेति** देशस्य, **निशीति** कालस्य, **नैरृतम्** इति देवतायाः । **पाकयज्ञविधानेने**ति इतिकर्तव्यताविधानम् । 


[^१७२]:
     M G: vrataniyamaḥ

- <u>ननु</u> च पशुयागा अग्निष्टोमीयपशुसाध्या[^१७३] अग्निषोमीयपशुप्रकृतयः । 


[^१७३]:
     M G: -paśuyāgā

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । स एव पाकयज्ञप्रकृतिः । सत्य् अधिकारे हि सः[^१७४] । उक्तं च "पशुर् अपि द्रवति पयो ऽपि द्रवति" इति । **पाकयज्ञाः** पूर्णमासादयः ॥ ११.११८ ॥


[^१७४]:
     M G omit: saḥ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Avakīrṇa*’ means the breaking, by the Religious Student, of the vow of
celibacy,—*i.e*., sexual intercourse, an ‘immorality’; one who has done
this is ‘*avakīrṇī*,’ ‘the immoral religious student’

This is going to be described (under 120) as—‘the intentional emission
of semen.’

‘*One-eyed ass*’—This lays down the material to be used at the
sacrifice, along with its qualification.

‘*On the cross-way*.’—This lays down the place of the sacrifice.

‘*At night*.’—This lays down the time of the sacrifice.

‘*To Nirṛti*.’—This lays down the deity of the sacrifice.

‘*In* *the manner of the Pākayajña*.’—This prescribes the procedure to
be adopted at the sacrifice.

“As a matter of fact all *animal-sacrifices* have for their archetype
the *Agniṣṭoma*; as is clear from the fact that they can only be
accomplished by means of the animal-sacrifices at this latter
sacrifice—\[so that the said sacrifice of the ass must follow the
procedure of the Agnistoma, and not of the Pākayajña.\]”

True; but the same Agniṣṭoma is the archetype of the ‘Pākayajña’ also;
and it can be performed only when the agent is prompted by the desire
for those rewards that follow from that sacrifice. Then again, it has
been declared that ‘the animal also *flows*, and milk also flows’ \[so
that there is a distinct similarity between the Animal Sacrifice and the
Pākayajña offerings of milk\].

‘*Pākayajña*’— is a name applied to the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* and other
similar sacrifices.—(118)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 436);—in
*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 507);—in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 191);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 554);—in *Aparārkā* (p. 1140), which notes
that what is emphasised here is (*a*) that the ass should be one-eyed,
and (*b*) that the entire procedure of the *Pākayajña* sacrifice laid
down in *Gṛhyasūtra* should be carried out;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
909), which explains ‘*pākayajñavidhānena*’ as the entire procedure
consisting of the ‘*Parisam* *ū* *hana*’ and ‘*Paryukṣaṇa*’ and ending
with the ‘Principal offerings’ to *Vāta* and the other deities;—it notes
that the ‘night’ meant is that of *Amāvāṣyā* day;—and in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 363).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.118-123)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (3.280).—‘The Student becomes an *Avakīrṇin* by
approaching a woman; he becomes purified by offering an ass to Nirṛti.’

*Viṣṇu* (37.35).—‘Criminals of the fourth degree shall perform the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* or *Parāka* penances, or shall sacrifice a cow.’

Do. (28.48-51).—‘A voluntary emission of semen by a twice-born youth
during the period of his studentship has been pronounced a transgression
of the rule prescribed for students. Having loaded himself with this
sin, he must go begging to seven houses, clothed only with the skin of
the cow, and proclaiming his deed; eating once only a meal consisting of
the alms received at those houses, and bathing three times, he becomes
absolved from guilt at the end of one year. After an involuntary
emission of semen during sleep, the twice-born student must bathe,
worship the sun and recite, three times, the mantra “Again shall my
strength return to me, etc.”’

*Gautama* (23.17-20).—‘A Student who has broken the vow of chastity
shall offer an ass to Nirṛti on the cross-road. Putting on the skin of
that ass, with the hair turned outside, and holding a red vessel in bis
hands, he shall beg at seven houses, proclaiming his deed. He will be
purified after a year. For an involuntary discharge caused by fear or
sickness, or during sleep, he shall make an offering of clarified
butter, or place two pieces of fuel in the fire reciting the two verses
beginning with “*Retasya*.”’

Do. (25.1-2).—‘They say.—How many gods does a Student enter who violates
the vow of chastity?—They announce—His vital spirits go to the Maruts,
his strength to Indra, his sacred learning to Bṛhaspati, all the rest to
Agni.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.30-35).—‘A Student approaching a woman is called
*Āvakīrṇin*;—he shall offer an ass as the sacrificial animal; the
sacrificial meat-cake shall be offered to Nirṛti, or to Rakṣas, or to
Yama. Or, he may heap fuel on the fire on the night of the New Moon,
perform the preparatory rites required for the *Darvihoma*, and offer
two oblations of clarified butter. After he has made the offering, he
shall address the fire, closely joining his hands, turning sideways,
with the following texts “May the Maruts grant me, etc., etc.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.26.8-9).—‘A Student who has broken the vow of chastity
shall offer to Nirṛti an ass, according to the manner of the *Pākayajña*
rites,—a Śūdra eating the remnants of that offering.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (23.1-3).—‘If a Student has approached a woman, he shall slay
in the forest, at a place where four roads meet, an ass for the
*Rakṣas*, after kindling a common fire. Or, he may offer an oblation of
rice to Nirṛti. He shall throw the oblations with the mantra—“To Lust
*Svāhā*, etc.”’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra* (3.12.1-3, 6-8).
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

119	But a student who has broken his vow shall offer at night on a crossway to Nirriti a one-eyed ass, according to the rule of the Pakayagnas.
</details>
