+++
title = "131 मार्जार-नकुलौ हत्वा"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having killed a cat, an ichneumon, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, an iguana, an owl and a crow,—he shall perform the penance of the ‘Śūdra-killer.’—(131)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिमहत्वात् प्रायश्चित्तस्य समुदायवधे[^१८८] प्रायश्चित्तम् एतत् । तेअर्स्


[^१८८]:
     M G: samudāyavidheḥ

- <u>ननु</u> चात्र "साहित्यं न विवक्षितम्" इत्य् उक्तं यतो जातिभ्रंशकरादिषु । कथं चैते सर्वे[^१८९] चैकस्य हन्तव्यतया[^१९०] उपनयेयुः । अतिरिक्तसद्भावे न तन्निमित्तं स्यात् । अर्थान्तरम् एवैतद् वशेनैव तच् छक्यते वक्तुम् । तेनावृत्तेन हन्ता[^१९१] । अधिकवधे त्व् अन्यद् भविष्यति । नैतच् छ्रूयते न्यूने वधे च न स्यात् । "पयः पिबेत्" (म्ध् ११.१३१) इत्यादि प्रत्येकविधेन संबध्यते । न समुदाये प्रत्येकं वाक्यपरिसमाप्तिः समुदाये वा, अर्थान्तरे तु[^१९२] स्थातुं लभ्यन्ते । 


[^१९२]:
     M G add: na cet


[^१९१]:
     M G: hatā


[^१९०]:
     M G: hantāra


[^१८९]:
     M G: caitat | evaṃ sarve

- <u>यत्</u> तावद् उच्यते "साहित्यं न विवक्षितम्" इति, तत्र न विवक्ष्यते यत्र प्रत्येकं संबन्धिवाच्यम् अर्थवत् । यथा "यस्य पिता पितामहः सोमं न पिबेत्" (म्स् २.५.५) इति । यत्र पुनर् अविवक्ष्यमाणे वाच्यम् एवानर्थकं तत्र तत्परिहारार्थं युक्ता विवक्षा । यथा वक्ष्यति "सहस्रस्य प्रमापणे पूर्णे वानसि" (म्ध् ११.१३९) इति । अत्राविवक्षायां सहस्रस्येति व्यर्थं स्यात् । एवं हि शास्त्रान्तरविरोधाद् अतिमहत्वे युक्तैव विवक्षा । 

- <u>ननु</u> च पदोपादानतायाम् अपि लक्षणागतस्य विशेषणस्याविवक्षैव । यथा यस्योभयं हविर् इत्य् उभयशब्दार्थं तत्र तुल्यम् । अत्र हविर् उभयम् इति च पदद्वये वक्ष्यमाणे वाक्यभेदः । हविर् अत्रोभयं चेति[^१९३] । यत्रावस्थाभेदस् तत्र वाक्यभेदपरिहारार्थम् अवश्यं भेदः । अन्यतरस्मिन् व्यवहितो गुणो वा हातव्यो भवति । तथोभ्यशब्दे सर्वम् अस्ति । आर्च्छेद् इति (च्ड़्। शब् ओन् प्म्स् ६.४.२२) हविःशब्देन व्यवहितो भवति, संख्यानुरूपत्वात् । गुणानुवादकत्वं वास्य संभवति । अविवक्षिते च तस्मिन् परिशिष्टं वाक्यम् अर्थवाद एव । इह पुनः समुदायविवक्षायां सहस्रशब्दविवक्षायां वा कृत्स्नम् एव वाक्यम् अर्थकम् । तथा ह्य् एतावद् वाच्यं[^१९४] स्यात् । स्थानतां प्रमाणतां तथास्यां शूद्रहत्याव्रतम् इत्य् एतावद् वक्तव्यं स्यात् । प्रमाणे शूद्रहत्येति । एतावताम् एव हिंसा संभवति । 


[^१९४]:
     M G: vākyaṃ


[^१९३]:
     M G: veti

- तथान्यद् अप्य् एवं जातीयकं विशेषणं न विवक्ष्येत, समानन्यायत्वात्- "फलदानां तु वृक्षाणाम्" (म्ध् ११.१४१) इति । ततश् च सर्वम् असमञ्जसं[^१९५] स्यात् । 


[^१९५]:
     M G: asamañjasyaṃ

- पौरुषेयं चेदं वाक्यं नैव वैदिकम् । वेदे च कस्य पुरुषस्य प्रयोगः किमर्थम् अनर्थकं प्रयुक्तम् इति । इह तु बुद्धिपूर्वे प्रयोगे मात्रायाम् अप्य् अयुक्तम् आनर्थक्यम्[^१९६] । तत्साहित्यविवक्षाविसेषणविवक्षा[^१९७] वायुक्तैव[^१९८] । यच् चोक्तं "कथं चैते सर्वे च"[^१९९] इति तत्राप्य् आखेटकार्थमृगयायां[^२००] दावदाहिनो वा उपपाद्यतयैव ।


[^२००]:
     M G: ākheṭakamṛgayā


[^१९९]:
     M G: kathaṃ cediti sarvam eveti ca; J: kathaṃ ca tad iti sarva aita iti ca (the passage is unclear; I think it is a reference to the statement of the first pūrvapakṣa above)


[^१९८]:
     M G: yuktaiva


[^१९७]:
     M G: -viseṣeṇa vivakṣā


[^१९६]:
     M G: ānarthakye

- यद् अप्य् उक्तम् अतिरिक्तसद्भावे न तन्निमित्तम् इति, तद् अप्य् अयुक्तम् । न त्व् आधिक्ये पूर्वेषां नाशो न्यूनेषु च तथैव कल्पणा कार्या ॥ ११.१३१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Inasmuch as the expiation prescribed is a heavy one, it should be
understood as applying to a case where *all* these animals have been
killed.

“It has been asserted in connection with offences leading to loss of
caste, etc., that a combination is not meant. How too is it ever
possible for all these animals to come up before any one man and be
killed? If only some of these were present, the required conditions
would not be there; in fact it would become a wholly different case.
Hence the person meant should be one who has killed one of these animals
*repeatedly*. But there is nothing in the text, to show that this is
what is meant Nor can the expiation be taken as referring to the killing
of each single animal, as there is in the case of such assertion as ‘one
should drink milk, etc., etc.’” (132)

Thus then, the sentence cannot be taken either as referring to each of
the animals severally, or as referring to all of them together; nor is
there any third way possible.

It has been said that a *combination cannot* be meant. If a combination
is not meant, then the only way in which the text could be taken would
be to take it as referring to each individual singly; just as there is
in the case of the assertion ‘he whose father or grandfather has not
drunk the Soma, etc., etc.’ But in a case (like the present) where it is
found that the whole sentence becomes meaningless if it is not taken as
referring to a combination of all the individuals, it is only right
that, with a view to avoid such a contingency, the sentence should be
taken as referring to such combination; for instance, in the case of the
text—‘In the case of killing a thousand animals etc.’ (140),—if a
combination were not meant, the mention of the specific number
‘thousand’ would be meaningless. It is only when, if the sense adopted
happens to be very much contrary to what has been laid down in other
scriptural texts, that such a sense can be rejected.

“But even in a case where a certain idea is expressed directly by the
words of the text, no significance is ever meant to be attached to the
qualifications involved in its indirect implication; for instance, in
the ease of the assertion—‘he whose both sacrificial materials become
spoilt, etc.’—significance is not meant to be attached to the exact
denotation of the term ‘both.’ In this sentence there are two terms
‘both’ and ‘sacrificial material’; and if significance is attached to
both these terms, there results syntactical split, as we shall explain
later on. When however it is doubtful whether in a given case
significance attaches to the ‘material’ or the ‘both’—the two have to be
taken separately, in order to avoid the syntactical split; or what is
predicated in the sentence has to be taken as having no connection with
one of the two terms. Now what is in closest proximity to the predicate
‘becomes spoilt’ is the term ‘material,’—as is clear from the fact that
its *number* is more in keeping with that of this term; so that the
other term becomes reiterative of the qualification of the ‘material.’
If on the other hand, no significance attaches to the term ‘material,’
then, the rest of the sentence can be taken only as declamatory. In the
case in question, if a combination wore meant to be expressed, or if
stress were to be laid upon the term ‘thousand’ (in 140), the whole
sentence would become meaningless. So that all that the passage would
mean is that—‘one should perform the penance of the
Śūdra-killer......(?),’ and that ‘the act of killing these is similar to
the killing of a Śūdra,’ and all that this would secure would he that;
these few animals would not he killed (?)”

On the principle here enunciated, we might regard other qualifications
also as not meant to be emphasised; for instance under Verse 142. And
all this would lead to a deal of incongruity. Then again the passage we
are dealing with is the work of a human author, and it does not belong
to the Veda. In the case of a Vedic passage, whose usage would it
represent? And whom could we charge with having made use of a
meaningless assertion? In the case of a passage like the present one, on
the other hand, which is the conscious work of a human author, if there
is an incongruity in regard to even a single syllable, the writer
becomes at once open to the charge of having made use of a meaningless
expression.

For all these reasons the only right course is to regard *combination*
and its qualification as both equally meant to be significant.

As regards the argument that there can be no possibility of so many
animals being killed at one and the same time,—it is quite possible for
those who go on hunting excursions and who follow the profession of
setting fire to forests.

Lastly as regards the argument, that if even a single one of these
several animals is not killed, there would be no occasion for the
prescribed expiation,—this also is not right. For just as in the case of
the killing of more animals than those enumerated, so also in that of
killing fewer than those, a proper adjustment of the requisite expiation
can always be made.—(131)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1130), which adds that this
refers to intentional repetitions, of the act;—and in *Mitākṣarā*
(3.270) as laying down the ‘Six-monthy Penance’ for the killing of all
the animals mentioned, collectively.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.131-132)  
**

*Gautama* (22-19).—‘For injuring a frog, an ichneumon, a crow, a
chameleon, a musk-rat, a mouse or a dog (the penance is the same as that
for the murder of a Vaiśya).’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.6).—‘For killing a flamingo, a Bhāsa bird, a peacock,
a Brāhmaṇī duck, a Pracetaka, a crow, an owl, a frog, a musk-rat, a dog,
a Babhru, a common ichneumon, and so forth, the offender shall pay the
same fine as for the killing of a Śūdra.’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.13).—‘If a crow, a chameleon, a pea-cock, a Brāhmaṇī
duck, a swan, the vulture called *Bhāsa*, a frog, an ichneumon, a
musk-rat, or a dog has been killed, then the offender should perform the
same penance as that for killing a Śūdra.’

*Vaṣhiṣṭha* (21.24).—‘Having slain a dog, a cat, an ichneumon, a snake,
a frog, or a rat,—one shall perform the *Kṛcchra* penance of twelve
days’ duration, and also give something to a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇu* (50.30-32).—‘If he has intentionally killed a dog, he should
fast for three days. If he has unintentionally killed a mouse, or a cat,
or an ichneumon, or a frog, or a Duṇḍubha snake, or a large serpent—he
must fast for one day, and on the next day give a dish of milk, sesamum
and rice mixed together to a Brāhmaṇa and give him an iron hoe as his
fee: If he has unintentionally killed an iguana, or an owl, or a crow,
or a fish, he must fast for three days.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.271).—‘For killing a cat, an alligator, an ichneumon, a
frog or birds, one should drink milk for three days, or perform a
quarter of the *Kṛcchra* penance.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

समुच्चितानां वध एतत् प्रायश्चित्तम् । तथा च वक्ष्यति "अस्थिमतां तु सत्त्वानां सहस्रस्य प्रमापने" इति । अपरे तु लघुत्वाद् एतेषां शूद्रजातानां प्रतिलोमानाम् आयोगवक्षत्तृचण्डालानां यद् वधे प्रायश्चित्तं तद् एतत् समस्तवध इति । प्रत्येकं तु वध इदम् अन्यत् प्रायश्चित्तं पूर्वस्माल् लघूपदिश्यते ॥ ११.१३० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

132	Having killed a cat, an ichneumon, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, an iguana, an owl, or a crow, he shall perform the penance for the murder of a Sudra;
</details>
