+++
title = "146 अज्ञानाद् वारुणीम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one drinks wine unintentionally, he becomes pure by a sacrament; this, however, is not what should be prescribed in the case of doing the act intentionally; in which case there should be a penance involving death;—such is the settled law.—(146)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मेखलादीनां निषेधाद् उपनयनं विज्ञायते (च्ड़्। म्ध् ११.१५१) । तच्[^२१६] च स्मृत्यन्तरात् तप्तकृच्छ्रसहितम् । एवं हि गौतमः- "अमत्या मद्यपाने पयोघृतम् उदकं वायुं प्रति[^२१७] त्र्यहं तप्तानि सकृच्छ्रास् ततो ऽस्य संस्कारः" (ग्ध् २३.२) । सुरा चात्र न पैष्टी, किं तर्हि, गौडी माध्वी वा[^२१८] । कुत एतत् । स्मृत्यन्तरदर्शनात्- 


[^२१८]:
     M G omit: vā


[^२१७]:
     M G: vāyuś ceti


[^२१६]:
     M G: tataś

- प्रमादान् मद्यम् असुरां सकृत् पीत्वा द्विजोत्तमः ।

- गोमूत्रयावकाहारो दशरात्रेण शुध्यति ॥

पैष्ट्याश् च प्रमादपाने प्रत्यवायप्रायश्चित्तात्[^२१९] । व्रतं विधितो विज्ञाय संवत्सरं कणभक्षश् चान्द्रायणाभ्यासो वा । 


[^२१९]:
     M G: pratyavāyaḥ prāyaścittāt

- **मतिपूर्वं** तयोर् अपि पान एतद् **अनिर्देश्यम्** । किं तर्हि, येन **प्राणानाम् अन्तो** भवति । किं तत् । यत्[^२२०] मुख्यायाः सुराया उक्तम्[^२२१] । अभ्यासे चैतद् द्रष्टव्यम् । "सकृत्पाने असुरामद्यपाने[^२२२] चान्द्रायणम् अभ्यसेत्"[^२२३] इति । 


[^२२३]:
     M G: ācaret


[^२२२]:
     M G: sakṛtpāne surāpāne


[^२२१]:
     M G: mukhyā yā suroktā


[^२२०]:
     M G: yatra

- इयम्[^२२४] अत्र व्यवस्था । बुद्धिपूर्वं पैष्ट्याः पाने प्राणान्तम् एव । तस्या एवाबुद्धिपूर्वं सकृत्पाने कणभक्षणचान्द्रायणाभ्यासः । अबुद्धिपूर्वे ऽप्य् असकृत्पाने बुद्धिपूर्ववत्[^२२५] । अन्येषां तु मद्यानां[^२२६] बुद्धिपूर्वत्वे चान्द्रायणम् अभ्यसेद् इति । अबुद्धिपूर्वं सकृत्पाने तप्तकृच्छ्रसंस्कारगोमूत्रयावकद्रव्याणि[^२२७] । अबुद्धिपूर्वम् असकृत्पाने पैष्टीवत् ॥ ११.१४६ ॥


[^२२७]:
     J: -yavaka-


[^२२६]:
     M G: madyapānāṃ


[^२२५]:
     M G: abuddhipūrve buddhipūrve ca


[^२२४]:
     M G: śreyam
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Inasmuch as in connection with this ‘Initiation,’ the use of the
girdle-zone and other things has been forbidden, it follows that it
stands here for ‘Initiation’; and on the strength of another Smṛti-text,
this should be accompanied by the ‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*’ penance. Says
Gautama—‘In the case of unintentional drinking of wine, one should live
for three days upon milk, clarified butter, water and air, performing
the Tapta-kṛcchra,—then should follow his Initiation’ (23.2).

The ‘*wine*’ meant here is not that which is distilled from grains, but
those that are distilled from molasses and honey.

“From what does this follow?”

It follows from what we learn from another Smṛti-text—‘The Brāhmaṇa who
unintentionally drinks wine *other than that distilled from grains*,
becomes pure by subsisting, for ten days, on cow’s urine, and
barley-products.’ So that in the case of the unintentional drinking of
wine distilled from grains, there is to be an ordinary form of expiation
(and not Re-initiation),—either in the one form of the penance involving
the subsisting for one year on pieces of grain, or in the performance of
the ‘Chāndrāyaṇa.’

In the case of the *intentional* drinking of even the two kinds of wine
(that distilled from molasses and that distilled from honey), the
aforesaid expiation should not be prescribed; in such a case, the
expiation should be one that brings about the death of the offender.

“What expiation would this be?”

The same that has been prescribed above for the drinking of the wine
that is distilled from grains, which is the most important form of wine.

This, however, should be understood to apply to cases of *repeated*
drinking (of the two kinds of wine); since for *once* drinking wines
*other than that distilled from grains*, the performance of the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* penance has been laid down.

Thus the ‘*settled law*’ on this point is as follows:—(*a*) If one
drinks intentionally the wine distilled from grains, there should be a
penance ending in death;—(*b*) if he drinks that same wine
unintentionally, and once only, he should live upon pieces of grain and
perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*;—(*c*) if he does it unintentionally, but
repeatedly, then it shall be just as in the case of intentional
drinking;—(*d*) in the case of the intentional drinking of other wines,
one should perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*;—(*e*) in the case of the
unintentional drinking of these, once only, there should be the
‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*’ Initiation and subsisting on cow’s urine and
barley-products;—and (*f*) in the case of unintentional, but repeated,
drinking of these, it shall be just as in the case of the wine distilled
from grains.—(146)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anirdeśyam*.’—‘What is stated in the first half is not to be
prescribed in the case of the *intentional* drinking of Vāruṇī’
(Medhātithi and Nandana);—‘Any expiation involving death shall not be
prescribed even in the wise of the intentional drinking of Vāruṇī’
(Nārāyaṇa and others.)

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1074), which explains the meaning
to be—‘The intentional drinking of *Surā* is an offence for which no
expiation can be prescribed by any Assembly; it has to be found out by
the offender himself.’ It adds that the re-performance of the
sacramental rites in itself cannot absolve the man from the sin; these
rites have to be performed after the man has undergone the expiation
specifically prescribed for wine-drinking.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.255), which adds that the sacramental
rites are to be performed after the performance of the *Tapta-Kṛcchra*.

It is quoted in *Parāyaścittaviveka* (p. 100), which explains the second
half to mean that ‘if one drinks wine *intentionally*, then the
expiation just prescribed will not serve his purpose his only expiation
will consist in giving up his life.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

[(See texts under 91 *et
seq*.)]

*Gautama* (23.2).—‘If the Brāhmaṇa has drunk wine unintentionally, he
shall subsist for three days on hot milk, clarified hatter and water;
and inhale hot air. This penance is called *Tapta-Kṛcchra*. After that
he shall undergo a second initiation.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.19).—‘For unintentionally drinking wine one shall
perform the *Kṛcchra* penance for three months and he initiated again.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.19).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa intentionally drinks liquor other
than that distilled from rice, or if he unintentionally drinks liquor
extracted from rice, he must perform a *Kṛcchra* and an *Atikṛcchra*,
and after eating clarified butter, he initiated again.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.1-4).—‘A drinker of liquor must abstain from all religions
rites and subsist on grains separated from the husk, for a year. If a
man has knowingly tasted any of the excretions of the body, or of
intoxicating drinks, he should perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa* penance. In all
these cases, the twice-born man shall be initiated a second time, after
the penance is over,’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.255).—‘On drinking the Vāruṇī wine or semen, or urine
or ordure, unwittingly, the three twice-born castes shall undergo
initiation a second time.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तप्तकृच्छ्रसहितेन पुनःसंस्कारेण शुध्यतीत्य् एतद् गौतमाद् विज्ञायते, न संस्कारेण मात्रेण तस्यात्यन्ताल्पत्वात् । तथा च गौतमः- "अमत्या मद्यपाने पयो घृतम् उदकं वायुं प्रतित्र्यहं तप्तानि स कृच्छ्रस् ततो ऽस्य संस्कारः" (ग्ध् २३.२) इति । इहापि चाभक्ष्यप्र्करणे कृच्छ्र उक्तः, मूत्रादिप्राशने सप्रत्यये "मत्या भुक्त्वाचरेत् कृच्छ्रं रेतो विण्मूत्रम् एव च" इति । स च तप्तकृच्छ्रो गौतमीयाद् एव । अत्र पुनःसंस्कारः सहकारित्वेन प्रायस्चित्ततया विज्ञायते । एवं च सति न मुख्यसुरायाः पैष्ट्या अमत्या पान एतत् प्रायस्चित्तम्, किं तर्हि गौडीमाद्व्योर् अमत्या पाने, तत्प्रत्यासत्तेः । तथा च तत्र गौडीमाध्व्योर् [मत्या पा]ने कणपिण्याकम् अब्दं प्रायश्चित्तम् उक्तम्, न पैष्ट्यं प्राणान्तिकप्रायश्चित्तवैकल्पिकम् । इतरथा हि समानार्थत्वे को दैवशप्तो लघुप्रायश्चित्तं परित्यज्य कणादिभक्षणम् अत्यन्ताभिप्रेतमूलहरं प्राणान्तिकं कुर्यात् । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम्- "[अ]सुरामद्यपाने चान्द्रायणम् अभ्यसेत्" इति । एवं च सति मुख्यसुरापानप्रायश्चित्तस्य प्राणान्तिकाख्यस्यानेन लघुनात्यन्तविप्रकर्षात्, गौडीमाध्व्योर् एवामत्यापान एतत् प्रायश्चित्तम् । न च सप्रत्ययाप्रत्ययव्यतिक्रमप्रायश्चित्तयोर् एकविषययोर् इवाभेद उपपद्यते । यथान्यत्र । एत्च् च सकृत् पाने असुरामद्ययोः प्रायश्चित्तं सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम्-


> प्रमादान् मद्यम् असुरां सकृत् पीत्वा द्विजोत्तमः ।  
> गोमूत्रयावकाहारो दशरात्रेण शुध्यति ॥ इति ।

**मतिपूर्वं** तु गौडीमाध्वयोः पानम् अभ्यसतः **अनिर्देश्यम्** इदं प्रायश्चित्तम् । किं तर्ह्य् अस्यान्यत् प्राणान्तिकम् एव सप्रत्ययाभ्यासदोषाधिक्येन यथा पैष्ट्याः इति । एतस्माद् एव च सामर्थ्यान् मुख्यसुरापाने ऽप्य् अप्रत्यये सप्रत्ययप्रायश्चित्ताद् ईषद् ऊनं प्रायस्चित्तान्तरम् उत्प्रेक्ष्यम् । तथा च वक्ष्यति- "शक्तिं चावेक्ष्य पापं च प्रायश्चित्तम् प्रकल्पयेत्" इति ॥ ११.१४५ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

147	He who drinks unintentionally (the spirituous liquor, called) Varuni, becomes pure by being initiated (again); (even for drinking it) intentionally (a penance) destructive to life must not be imposed; that is a settled rule.
</details>
