+++
title = "170 गुरुतल्पव्रतङ् कुर्याद्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one has had sexual intercourse with his uterine sister, or with the wife of his friend, or of his son, or with an unmarried maiden, or with a lowest-born woman,—he should perform the penance prescribed for the ‘violation of the Preceptor’s Bed.’—(170)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गुरुतल्पव्रतम्** इत्य् अविशेषवचने ऽपि, न तेन "स्वप्यात्"[^२६५] (म्ध् ११.१०३) इत्येवमाद्य् अतिदिश्यते, अपि तु "प्राजापत्यं चरेद् अब्दम्" (म्ध् ११.१०५) इति महापातकत्वात् । न हि महापातकेभ्यो ऽन्यत्र मरणान्तं प्रायश्चित्तम् अस्ति । अभ्यासे तु स्याद् इति । 


[^२६५]:
     M G: svayonyādiṣv; J: supyād

- **स्वयोनयो** भगिन्यः सोदराः । **सख्युः स्त्रीषु** सुहृद्भार्यासु । सुहृत्त्वम् एवात्र कारणम्, न यौनादिविशेषः, नापि श्रोत्रियत्वादिगुणः । एवं **पुत्रस्य स्त्रीषु** स्नुषासु । असमानजातीयास्व् अपि **कुमारीषु** पित्रादिभिर्[^२६६] अदत्तासु । स्वयं संप्रीत्यानुपनतास्व् एतद् एव बलाद् गमने । 


[^२६६]:
     M G: putrādibhir

- अत्रापि न सत्य् अपेक्षा । यद्य् अप्य् अतिदेशे विशेषो नास्ति तथापि प्रायश्चित्तद्वयं स्याद् इति, दृष्टत्वात् । तथा च गुरुलघुभावाद् धीनजातीयासु कृच्छ्राब्दाच् चान्द्रायणं मासत्रयं लघीय आदेश्यम् । 

- **अन्त्यजाश्** चाण्डालम्लेच्छादिस्त्रियः । चण्डालादिस्त्रीषु च स्मृत्यन्तरे ज्ञानाज्ञानकृतो विशेष उक्तः "अन्त्यावसायागमने कृच्छ्रार्धम् अन्यासु[^२६७] द्वादशरात्रम्" ॥ ११.१७० ॥


[^२६७]:
     M G: amatyāsu
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though the text speaks generally of ‘the penance prescribed for the
violation of the Preceptor’s Bed,’ without any qualifications, yet it
does not mean the application to the present case of what has been said
regarding ‘sleeping on a redhot iron-bedstead,’ and so forth (under
Verse 104); what it does mean, however, is the performing for one year
of the ‘Prājāpatya penance,’ which has been laid down in Verse 106. That
such must be the meaning is clear from the fact that the violating of
the Preceptor’s Bed is a ‘heinous offence’; and apart from the ‘heinous
offences,’ there is no penance leading to death; though there may be
this in cases of repetition (of non-heinous offences also).

‘*Svayoni*’—uterine sister.

‘*Wife of a friend*.’—The consort of a loving friend; what constitutes
the seriousness of this offence is the affectionate regard of the
friend, and not any blood-relationship, nor any such qualification of
the husband as Vedic learning and the like.

Similarly in the case of ‘*the wife of his son*’—the daughter-in-law.

‘*Unmarried maiden*’—of other castes also. This is meant to refer to
intercourse with those who have not yet been given away by their
fathers, and who have not surrendered themselves through love,—the
intercourse being entirely by force.

In connection with this also, the exact penance shall be regulated by
several considerations. Though the text has added no qualifications to
the general application of the law relating to the ‘violation of the
Preceptor’s bed,’ yet in any two cases there may be two distinct
penances, as is actually found to be the case. For instance, on account
of the comparative heaviness or lightness of the offence, there would,
in the case of women of the lower castes, be the performance of the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* for three months, which would be lighter than that of the
*Kṛcchra* for one year (which would have to be done in the case of other
women).

‘*Lowest-born* ’—*Caṇḍāla* and *Mleccha* women. In the case of *Caṇḍāla*
women, a distinction in the penance has to be made on the ground of the
act being intentional or unintentional,—as is clear from other *Smṛti*
texts. For instance, in the case of women of the ‘*antyāvasāya*’ caste,
the penance would be a ‘Half-Kṛcchra,’ while in others, it would be one
lasting for twelve days.—(170)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 544);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Prāyaścitta, p. 252), as referring to cases where the act is repeated
for one month;—and again on p. 264, where it says that it refers to
cases of repeated acts when *unintentional*, but a single act when
*intentional*;—also in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 181 and 187), which says
that this refers to cases other than those where the intercourse has
been within the forbidden circle,—it explains ‘*Svayoniṣu*’ as ‘one’s
own paternal and maternal relatives’—‘*antyajāṣu*’ as ‘Chaṇḍāla
women—and ‘*Gurutalpavratam*’ as the ‘twelve years penance.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.170-171)  
**

[(See text under 49,
above.)]

*Gautama* (23.12, 13, 32).—‘The guilt of one who has intercourse with
the wife of a friend, a sister, a female belonging to the same family,
the wife of a pupil, a daughter-in-law,—or with a cow—is as great as
that of him who violates the Guru’s bed. Some people declare the guilt
of such a person to be equal to that of a Student who breaks the vow of
continence. For intercourse with a female of one of the lowest castes,
one shall perform a *Kṛcchra* penance during one year.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.13-14).—‘Intercourse with females who must not be
approached, cohabitation with the female friend of a female *Guru*, with
the female friend of a male *Guru*, with an *Apapātra* woman, or with a
female outcast,......... the expiation is to live like an outcast for
two years.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.15-16).—‘The expiation for intercourse with the wife of a
teacher, of a son, or of a pupil is that, having shaved all his hair and
smeared his body with clarified butter, the man shall embrace the heated
iron-image of a woman. If he has had intercourse with a female
considered venerable in the family, with a female friend, with the
female friend of a *Guru*, with an *Apapātra* female, or with an
outcast,—he shall perform the *Kṛcchra* penance for three months.’

*Viṣṇu* (34.1-2).—‘Sexual connection with one's mother, or daughter, or
daughter-in-law are crimes of the highest degree. Such criminals of the
highest degree should proceed to the flames; there is no other way of
atoning for their crime.’

Do. (53.1),—‘One who has had illicit sexual intercourse must perform the
*Prājāpatya* penance for one year,—according to the rule of the
*Mahāvrata*, clad in a garment of bark and living in a forest.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.231-232).—‘Intercourse with a friend’s wife, a maiden,
a uterine sister, with women of the lowest castes, with women of the
same *gotra*, with a daughter-in-law,—is declared to be as heinous as
that of violating the Guru’s bed. A man who has intercourse with his
father’s sister, or mother's sister, or maternal aunt, or
daughter-in-law, or step-mother, or sister, or his preceptor’s daughter,
or his preceptor’s wife, or his own daughter,—is *a violator of the
Guru’s bed*; he should have his organ cut off and killed; so also the
woman who fell in love with him.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अकुमारीष्व् अपि चण्डालादिस्त्रीषु चान्यद् अपि प्रायश्चित्तम् वक्ष्यति । "चण्डालान्त्यस्त्रियो गत्वा" इत्य् एवमादि ॥ ११.१६८–१६९ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

171	He who has had sexual intercourse with sisters by the same mother, with the wives of a friend, or of a son, with unmarried maidens, and with females of the lowest castes, shall perform the penance, prescribed for the violation of a Guru's bed.
</details>
