+++
title = "176 विप्रदुष्टां स्त्रियम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the wife is particularly corrupt, her husband should keep her confined in one room, and should make her perform that penance which has been prescribed for males in cases of adultery.—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वि**शेषेण **प्रदुष्टां** **निरुन्ध्यात्** पत्नीकार्येभ्यो निर्वर्तयेत् "अर्थस्य संग्रहे चैनाम्" (म्ध् ९.११) इत्यादिभ्यः । **एकवेश्मनीति** निगडबन्धे कर्तव्या । न स्वैरं भर्तृगृहे विहर्तुं लभेत । तत्र निरुद्धां प्रायश्चित्तं कारयेत् । 

- <u>किं</u> पुनः ।

- **<u>यत्</u> पुंसः परदारेषु** प्रायश्चित्तम् उपपातकं ब्राह्मणस्य तत्समानहीनजातीयासु पारदार्यम् इति । वर्णान्तराणां तद् एव । उत्तमागमने तु द्विगुणं वैश्यस्य त्रिगुणं ब्राह्मण्यां क्षत्रियस्य । तथायं विशेषो द्वे परदारे त्रीणि श्रोत्रियस्येति । शूद्रस्य ब्राह्मणीगमने महापातकप्रायश्चित्तम् । वैश्यस्य क्षत्रियागमन उपपातकं द्विगुणं त्रिगुणम् । केचित् तूत्तमागमने शूद्रस्य ब्राह्मणीवद् इच्छन्ति । "प्रातिलोम्ये वधः पुंसाम्" (य्ध् २.२८८) इति लिङ्गदर्शनात्, एतद् उक्तम् । दण्डेष्व् अपि विशेषो दर्शितः । यथैवोत्तमागमने पुंसां व्यवस्था तथैव स्त्रीणां हीनजातीयपुरुषसंपर्के चेति । दोषे ऽपि[^२७४] स्त्रीणाम् अर्धं प्रायश्चित्तम् । 


[^२७४]:
     M G: -saṃparke yuvatidoṣe 'pi

- प्रायश्चित्तार्धम् अर्हन्ति स्त्रियो रोगिण एव च ।

- बालश् चा षोडशाद् वर्षाद् अशीतिपरतः पुमान् ॥ 

- तथा दृष्टव्यभिचारायां गमने लघीयः । स्वैरिण्यां वृषल्याम् अवकीर्णः सचैलस्नानाद् उदकुम्भं दद्याद् ब्राह्मणाय । वैश्यायां चतुर्थकालाहारो ब्राह्मणं भोजयेत् । क्षत्रियायां त्रिरात्रोपोषणं यवाढकं दद्यात् । वैश्यवद् इत्य् अपि स्मर्यते । तद्वच् छूद्रम् आर्यायां द्रष्टव्यम् । ऋतौ वा गच्छतो गर्भम् आदधतो वा ।

- ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां स्त्रियः शूद्रेण संगताः ।

- अप्रजाता विशुध्येयुः प्रायश्चित्तेत नेतरा ॥ (वध् २१.१२)

- अथ वा या एता न केनचिद् ऊह्यन्ते, वैश्येन चरन्ति, तद्गमने ऽस्ति प्रायश्चित्तं नेति संदेहः । 

- <u>कुतः</u> संशयः । 

- <u>दारशब्दस्य</u> संस्कारशब्दत्वात् । असति विवाहे न ता अस्य दारा इति व्यपदेशम् अर्हन्ति । पारदार्ये च प्रायश्चित्तम् । अतो नास्तीत्य् अवगच्छामः । यतस् तु "स्वदारनिरतः" (म्ध् ३.४५) इति नियमो विहितो ऽतो भवतीति मन्यामहे । 

- <u>किं</u> पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् ।

- <u>अस्तीति</u> ।

- <u>कुतः</u> ।

- <u>नियमस्य</u> विहितत्वात् । "अकुर्वन् विहितम्" (म्ध् ११.४३) इत्यादि, तदतिक्रमे प्रायश्चित्तस्मरणात् । मा भून् नामोपपातकम् । न तावता प्रायश्चित्ताभावः[^२७५] प्रायश्चित्तार्थम् उपपातकजातिभ्रंशकरादि परिगणितम् । सामान्यं तु निमित्तं सर्वत्राकुर्वन् विहितम् इत्यादि । 


[^२७५]:
     M G omit: prāyaścittābhāvaḥ

- उक्तं च प्राक् "स्वैरिणीत्यादि" ।

- <u>ननु</u>[^२७६] मृतभर्तृपक्षेण[^२७७] पितृपक्षेण वा संबद्धैव परदारव्यपदेश्या । अधिकाम् अविहारित्वात् स्वैरिण्यः । 


[^२७७]:
     M G: mṛtabhartṛkābhartṛpakṣeṇa


[^२७६]:
     M G: tat ca

- <u>सत्यम्</u> । वेश्यास्व् अपि स्वातन्त्र्यावलंबनः स्वैरिशब्दो न विरुध्यते ।

- अतश् च तासां सचैलस्नानोदकुम्भादिदानम् । 

- <u>तत्र केचिद्</u> आहुः । व्रतम् एतत् । तस्य "व्रतम्" (म्ध् ३.१) इत्य् उपक्रम्य "व्रतानीमानि धारयेत्" (म्ध् ४.१३) इति च यानि विहितानि तानि स्नातकव्रतानि, न सर्वपुरुषधर्मः ॥ ११.१७६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If she is ‘*particularly corrupt the husband should keep her
confined*’—*i.e*., keep her away from all the duties of a wife’ such as
‘the collecting of wealth’ and so forth (described under 9.11).

‘*In one room*’—*i.e*., she should be kept in chains, and should not be
permitted to roam about at will in her husband’s house.

While thus confined, she should be made to perform the necessary
expiation.

“What expiation?”

‘*That penance which, has been prescribed for males in cases of
adultery*’—that is, in the case of a Brāhmaṇa, adultery, when committed
upon a woman of equal or inferior castes, is to be treated as a ‘minor
offence,’ which involves the corresponding expiation. So also in the
case of men of other castes; but when these latter commit the act on a
woman of a superior caste, the expiation for the Vaiśya shall be double;
it shall be triple in the case of a Kṣatriya misbehaving with a Brāhmaṇa
woman. But for a Vedic scholar, the expiation shall be trebled;—when a
Śūdra misbehaves with a Brāhmaṇa woman, the expiation is that which has
been prescribed for ‘heinous offences’;—when a Vaiśya misbehaves with a
Kṣatriya woman, it is to be treated as a ‘minor offence.’ All this
distinction has been explained under ‘Punishments,’ The rules regarding
women misbehaving with men of inferior castes shall be the same as those
relating to men misbehaving with women of superior castes.

But though the offence may be equal, the corresponding expiation for
women shall be only *half* (of what is prescribed for males);—‘women and
sick men, boys up to the sixteenth year of age and men after or beyond
the eightieth year are subject to only one-half of the prescribed
expiation’—says a text

The expiation is lighter in the case of a woman whose unchastity is well
known. For instance, if one misbehaves with an unchaste low-caste woman,
he should bathe along with his clothes and give a water-jar to a
Brāhmaṇa; and if with a similar Vaiśya woman, he should take food at the
fourth meal-time and feed Brāhmaṇas; if with a Kṣatriya woman, he should
fast for three days and should give a *yavāṭaka*. It has also been
declared that he may be treated like a Vaiśya. The same should be
understood to be the case with the wife of a Śūdra. In connection with
people having intercourse with women during their courses or bringing
about their conception, it has been declared that—‘if women of the
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya castes, have intercourse with a Śūdra,
they could be purified by expiations, if they have not conceived,—not
otherwise.’

In the case of women who have not been wedded by any one, and live by
prostitution, it is doubtful whether or not an expiation is necessary
for having intercourse with them.

“Why should there be any such doubt?”

Because the term ‘*dāra*,’ ‘wife,’ connotes consecration (a woman who
has passed through the sacrament of marriage); and when no marriage has
been performed, the woman cannot be called any one’s ‘wife and
expiations are necessary only in the case of intercourse with the
‘*wife*’ *of another person*. This would lead us to the conclusion that
in the case in question no expiation is needed. On the other band, since
it has been laid down that ‘one should remain attached *to his own*
wife,’ we think that there should be expiation in the case in question
(as it involves infidelity to one’s own wife).

“What then is the right view on this point?”

The right view is that expiation *is* necessary.

“Why so?”

Because the restriction (that one should he devoted to his own wife) has
been directly *enjoined*, and expiation has been declared to be
necessary in the case of one’s omitting to do what has been *enjoined*
(11.41). Even though the offence may not fall under the category of
‘minor offences,’ yet that does not mean that there is to be no
expiation. The various kinds of offences—‘minor offences,’ ‘offences
leading to loss of caste,’ and so forth—have been enumerated, not by way
of an exhaustive list (of offences requiring expiation), but only for
the purpose of indicating the necessary expiations. The condition common
to all offences has been summed up as—‘omitting to do what is enjoined,
etc., etc.’ (11.44). The ease of the ‘wanton’ woman has been already
explained, and the prostitute also is an ‘unchaste woman.’

“As a matter of fact, only that woman is to be called ‘another’s wife,’
‘*paradāra*’ (in connection with the present context) who has
intercourse with the paternal or maternal relations of her husband; and
such women become known as ‘wanton,’ when they have intercourse with
several men.”

True; but to the prostitute also, the term ‘*svairiṇī*,’ ^(‘)wanton,’ is
applicable on the basis of her *wantonness or want of self-control*.

Hence in the case of these, there should he both, bathing along with
clothes, and also the giving of a water-jar.

In connection with adultery some people hold the following opinion—The
avoiding of sexual intercourse is of the nature of a *vow*, and as such
pertains, not to all men, but to the Accomplished Student; as it is in
reference to him that the texts have set forth the section beginning
with the words^(‘)now his vow,’ and ending with—^(‘)these vows he shall
keep.’—(176)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The second half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (1.70), and again
under 3.265, as laying down the ‘Three Years’ Penance’ and such other
penances for the woman’s offence of adultery with a man of the higher
caste;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 98);—and the first half is quoted in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 285), which explains that the first
half of the verse lays down what is to be done by the husband of the
offending woman, and the second half what is to be done by the woman
herself;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 370), which says that the
meaning is that the husband should keep her in a room, without toilet or
bath, meanly dressed, sleeping on the ground, with food just enough to
keep her alive,—all this till her next menstruation.
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.176-177)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.63).—‘If one’s wife has misbehaved, she shall be
kept confined, and made to perform the same penance that has been
prescribed for the man committing adultery.’

*Viṣṇu* (53.8).—‘A woman who has committed adultery once must perform
that penance which has been prescribed for the adulterer.’

*Paribhāṣā* (Aparārka, p. 1124).—‘For women and invalids, the expiatory
penances are only half of what has been prescribed for men.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 1124).—‘The woman who commits adultery should
perform that same penance which men perform for the guilt of having
intercourse with women of the same caste...... If the act has been
committed without the woman’s consent, her husband shall keep her
guarded in the house, clad in dirty clothes, sleeping on the ground, and
subsisting on food given to her just enough to keep her alive; and he
should have the expiatory penances of *Kṛcchra* and *Parāka* performed
by her.’

*Uśanas* (Do., p. 1125).—‘If a man’s wife has misbehaved, he should keep
her clad in inferior clothes, with all her authority taken away from
her; and she should he made to perform either the *Cāndrāyaṇa* or the
*Prājāpatya*.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘If a woman has been ravished by force, with her heart
burning with shame, she becomes purified by performing the *Prājāpatya*;
there is no other purification for her.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṇga* (Do.).—‘If a woman has been ravished by force by a man of
her own caste, her expiation shall consist of fasting for three days.’

*Gautama* (Do.)—‘A misbehaved woman shall be kept guarded and receive
mere subsistence.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

177	An exceedingly corrupt wife let her husband confine to one apartment, and compel her to perform the penance which is prescribed for males in cases of adultery.
</details>
