+++
title = "181 यो येन"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man associates with any one of outcasts, he should, for his own purification, perform the same penance that has been prescribed for that outcast.—(181)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस्य पतितस्य यद् विहितं तत् प्रायश्चित्तं कुर्यात् **तत्संसर्गस्य शुद्धये** । **एषाम्** इति निर्धारणे षष्ठी । **एषां** पतितानां **येन पतितेन यः संसर्गं याति** पूर्वोक्तसंसर्गं गच्छति **स तस्यैव** पतितस्य यद् विहितं प्रायश्चित्तं **तत् कुर्यात्** । तत्संसर्गाद् यो दोष उत्पन्नस् **तद्विशुद्धये** तद्विनाशाय । अनुवादो ऽयं श्लोकपूरणः । 

- अथ यद् इदम् उच्यते पतितात्याग्यपतितात्यागीत्यादिनिन्दितकर्माभ्यासेन पतनम् तत्र यद् एतत् पतितत्ववचनं तत् किम् उपदिश्यत आहोस्विद् अतिदिश्यते । यदि तावद् उपदिश्यते पञ्च पातकानीति प्रसिद्धेर् मूलं[^२९५] वाच्यम् । अथ पञ्चानुगमौपदेशिकम् अन्येषाम् आतिदेशिकैर् व्यवहारे भेदे न कश्चिद् अर्थः । तान्य् एव प्रायश्चित्तानि त एव धर्मा यस्मा उपदिश्यन्ते, अतिदेशेन व्यवहारेण को ऽर्थः । 


[^२९५]:
     M G: prasiddhamūlaṃ

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । न व्यवहाराः प्रयोजन एव भिद्यन्ते । अपि त्व् अन्यतो ऽपि निमित्तात्, इह चास्ति प्रमाणतो भेदः । यत्र पतितत्वम् अभिधाय द्विजातिकर्मभ्यो हानिः पतितस्योदकं कार्यम् इत्याद्य् अभिधीयते सकृत् स्वधर्माभिधानाद् उपदेशः । यत्र तु तत्संबन्धवचनान् नाम्ना लिङ्गसंयोगाद् वा तद्धर्मप्राप्तिः सो ऽतिदेशः । सूर्याग्निपदयोर् न हि सौर्ये कश्चिद् धर्मः श्रुतो येनातिदेशे सत्य् अयं विशेषो लभ्य इति निश्चीयते । 

- <u>तद् असत्</u> । यतः सूर्यादिशब्दस्यैव प्रभुता, अकृतत्वाद् वेदस्य । अयं पौरुषेयो ग्रन्थः । पुरुषश् चासति भेदे किमिति व्यवहारं नवं प्रवर्तयति । या तु प्रत्यक्षानुमानाभ्यां बाधकाभावात् सिद्धिः सात्र कदाचिद् उपलभ्यते । यो ऽप्य् अभ्यासः सो ऽपि द्विरावृत्तिस् तत्र ततः प्रवृत्तिः आवृत्तिशतेष्व् अभ्यासरूपतयैक एवेति । लोके तावद् आवृत्तिमात्रम् अभ्यासः । तत्र यो ऽपि द्विर् अपवादः यो ऽपि शतकृत्वः तौ द्वाव् अपि प्रायश्चित्ते समौ स्याताम् । निन्दितं च कर्म प्रतिषिद्धम् । तत्र यो ऽपि द्विर् दिवा सुप्याद् यो ऽपि गा असकृद् धन्यात् तत्र निन्दितकर्माभ्यासे ऽविशेषेण पतनप्राप्तिः । तस्माद् विचिन्त्यम् एतत् । 

- <u>किम्</u> अत्र चिन्त्यते । पञ्चानां तावत् पातकित्वं सर्वस्मृतिकारैर् उच्यते, अन्येषां केषांचित् तत्समत्वम्[^२९६] । तद् उभयम् अपि बाधितुं तत्र विशेषो नास्तीति संकल्पयिष्यते[^२९७] "शक्तिं चावेक्ष्य पापं च" (म्ध् ११.२०८) इति । न हि तस्य तत्सदृशस्येति वा एकत्वं युक्तम्, गार्गवस्येव[^२९८] । अथ केषांचिद् धर्माणां भेदः केषांचिद् एकत्वे सादृश्यं भवति । 


[^२९८]:
     M G: gorgavayasyeva


[^२९७]:
     M G: saṃkalpa iṣyate


[^२९६]:
     M G: samatvam

- तस्मात् तत्समानां पतित्वं भवति । अतः किंचिदूनं तत्समानां पतितप्रायश्चित्तम् ।

- अधिकारापगमे[^२९९] केचिद् विशेषम् आहुः । श्रौतेष्व् अधिकारो निवर्तते साक्षात्, न स्मार्तेषु । 


[^२९९]:
     M G: adhikārāgame

- यद् अप्य् उक्तम् "द्विर् आवृत्तौ शतकृत्वश् चाभेदो न स्यात्" इति तत्राप्य् अभ्यासानां भेदः । कथं तुल्यप्रत्यवायता ।

- यद् अपि दिवास्वप्नगोवधयोर् निन्दितत्वाविशेषात् तदभ्यासे तुल्यं पतितत्वम् इति, कथम् अविशेषो निन्दायाः, यत्रार्थवादेषु प्रत्यवायविशेषः श्रूयते, प्रायश्चित्तबहुत्वं बाहुल्ये ऽपि प्रतिषेधे ।

- तत्रायं विधिः । "निन्दितकर्माभ्यासे पतनम्" इति न प्रतिषिद्धमात्रे, तथा च "पूर्णे चानसि" (म्ध् ११.१४०) इति । सत्य् अपि निन्दितकर्माभ्यासे नैव पातित्यम् अस्ति ॥ ११.१८१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For the atonement of the sin of associating with an outcast, the same
expiation is to be performed which has been prescribed for that outcast
himself.

In ‘*eṣam*,’ ‘*of these*,’ the Genitive has the sense of *selection*;
the sense being—‘From among these outcasts, if a man associates with any
one,—in the manner described in the preceding verse,—he should perform
that same expiation which has been prescribed for that same outcast;—for
the purpose of purifying—removing—the sin begotten by that association.’

This last phrase ‘*for the purpose*, etc.,’ serves only to fill up the
metre.

As a rule, a man becomes *degraded* (an outcast) by repeatedly doing
such degrading acts as not renouncing the company of outcasts. Now there
arises the question—Does this mean that the *degradation*—the
*outcastness*—that attaches itself to the associating person is
direct,—or is it only the degradation of the outcast that becomes
attributed to him indirectly? If it is something new, then it behoves
you to point out the authority for the assertion that ‘there are *five
heinous offences*.’ If it be held that in the case of the five, the
degradation is *direct*, while in that of others it is *indirect*,—then
there would be no point in making any such distinction. The acts being
the same, the expiations being the same, what would be the use for
attributing the degradation in one case, only *indirectly*?

*Objection*—Some people argue as follows:—“Usage does not always vary
with purposes only, it varies on other grounds also. In the present case
the distinction is based upon authoritative texts: For instance, in a
case where, having asserted *degradation*, the text goes on to explain
it as consisting in being deprived of the rights of twice-born
men,—*e.g*., in 182 below,—as the character is mentioned as belonging to
the man himself, the *degradation* is *direct*; on the other hand, where
the character is spoken of—either by name or by indicative words,—as due
to relations with the outcast, it is *indirect*. For instance, in
connection with the names ‘*Saurya*’ and ‘*Āgneya*,’ no characteristic
of the terms ‘*Sūrya*’ and ‘*Agni*’ is found to have been declared as
belonging to the *Saurya* and the *Āgneya*, on the basis whereof there
could be any transference of details from one to the other, which could
bestow any peculiar character on them. (*Vide* Mīmāṃsa-Sūtra,
8.1.27-31).’

“This, however, is not right; because in the case cited, the terms
‘*Sūrya*’ and the rest are all-powerful, since they form part of the
Veda, which is not the work of an author. The present treatise on the
other hand, is the work of a human author, and how can any such author
propound a distinction which does not exist in fact? There may be some
kinds of distinction which may be admitted, when not opposed to
well-known Perception or Inference. \[But cannot justify the assuring of
distinctions in all cases.\] As for *repetition*, it means the doing of
an act twice over; and it is in this sense that the term is used, even
in cases where the act is repeated a hundred times; for in all cases,
the character of ‘repetition’ is one and the same. In ordinary parlance
also ‘repetition’ means only duplicating the act. So that whether an act
is *repeated* twice, or a hundred times, the expiation due to
‘repetition’ shall be one and the same, as what is forbidden is a
despicable deed; and whether a man sleeps twice during the day, or kills
a cow more than once,—the condition that there is repetition of a
despicable act is one and the same, which should lead to the same kind
of ‘degradation.’ For these reasons what is here propounded needs to be
pondered over—is open to doubt”

*Answer*—What is there that needs pondering over? That the five acts are
sinful, leading to degradation, has been declared by all writers on
*Smṛti*; as also that some other acts are similar to those five. There
is no gainsaying these two facts; as for distinction among these, it can
be made on the basis of ‘the capacity of the agent, the nature of the
offence,’ and so forth (set forth in Verse 209 below). It can never be
that what has been declared as *similar* to a certain act should stand
on the same footing as that act itself; for instance, the cow cannot be
the same as the *gavaya*. The fact of the matter is that on certain
points the two acts differ between themselves, while On others they
resemble, and hence come to be spoken of as ‘similar.’

From all this it follows that those also who are *equal* to outcasts
become ‘outcasts,’ themselves; and in this case the expiation would be
just a little less than that in the case of actual outcasts.

In connection with the question of being deprived of rights and
privileges, some people put forward the special points that the man
becomes deprived only of the right of performing the *Śrauta* rites, and
not the *Smārta* ones.

It has been argued above that there would be no difference between doing
an act twice and doing it a hundred times over. But as a matter of fact,
there would certainly be a difference among the various degrees of
repetition. How could the offence in both cases be of the same degree?

Another argument put forward is that—‘Sleeping during the day and
cow-killing, both being forbidden acts, there would be the same degree
of ‘degradation’ involved in the repeated committing of both these
deeds. But how can the deprecation of the two acts be said to be of the
same degree;—when, as a matter of fact, we find a distinction between
the degree of sinfulness clearly set forth in the corresponding
declamatory passages? And there is multiplicity of expiation also in
cases where the prohibition is exceptionally emphatic.

The rule on this point is this:—That there is ‘degradation’ brought
about by the repeated performance of forbidden acts is not true of all
forbidden acts s for instance Verse 11.41 has declared that the killing
of 1,000 animals of one kind is equal to that of a single animal of
another; hence in several cases, even though a certain forbidden act may
be repeated several times, there is no ‘degradation’ at all.—(181)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 851), which notes that in
all these cases the lightness or heaviness of the expiation will depend
upon the caste and capacity of the person concerned;—in *Mitākṣarā*
(3.261);—in *Parāśaramadhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 23), which defines
‘*saṃsarga*’ as travelling together, sitting together and so forth;—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 141 and 165), which says that this refers to
the *Mahāpātakas* only,—and that ‘*Patita*’ here stands for the mere
‘offender’ or ‘sinner’ (not literally, the *outcast*);—and in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 356).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (54.1).—‘If a man associates with one guilty of a crime, he must
perform the same penance as that person.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 1088).—‘If a sinful man associates with another
man, the latter shall perform the same penance as the former, but only
three quarters of it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 1087).—‘If a man associates with a sinner for six
months, through sacrificing, teaching and the like, or though occupying
the same seat or couch with him, he should perform half of that penance
which has been prescribed for that sinner.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इदम् अपि च प्रायश्चित्तं महापातकिभिर् एव संबन्धे स्यात्, गोघातादिसंबन्धे तु सामान्यविहितं कल्प्यम् ॥ ११.१८० ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

182	He who associates with any one of those outcasts, must perform, in order to atone for (such) intercourse, the penance prescribed for that (sinner).
</details>
