+++
title = "188 एतद् एव"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This same method is to be adopted also in the case of female outcasts; but clothing, food and drink shall be supplied to them and they shall live close to the house.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**योषित्सु** स्त्रीष्व् **अपि पतितास्व्** **एष एव विधिः** । **पतितास्व्** अकृतप्रायश्चित्तासु च । ताभ्यस् तु कृतोदकाभ्यो ऽपि वस्त्रान्नं दातव्यम् । दानग्रहणात्, **वस्त्रान्ने** शरीरस्थितिमात्रसंपादिनी दातव्ये, न भोगादयः । **पानम्** औचित्याद् उदकम् । तच् च प्राचुर्याद् अदत्तम् अपि लभ्यते । वचनं तु परानुरोधात् प्रीत्या तद्[^३०५] अपि स्वातन्त्र्येण तासां[^३०६] न देयम् । यादृशं च पानं तादृशे एव वस्त्रान्ने ऽतो निकृष्टं वस्त्रं चान्नं दातव्यम् । तथोक्तम् ।


[^३०६]:
     M G: vānumāsaṃ


[^३०५]:
     M G omit: prītyā tad

- हृताधिकारां मलिनां पिण्डमात्रोपजीविनीम् ।

- परिभूताम् अधःशय्यां वासयेद् व्यभिचारिणीम् ॥ (य्ध् १.७०)

पातित्यहेतवश् च स्त्रीणां य एव मनुष्यस्य । यत् तु "भ्रूणहनि हीनवर्णसेवायाम्" (ग्ध् २१.९), "न च स्त्रीणाम् अधिकं भ्रूणहनि" इति, तत् तुल्यतार्थं न तु परिसंख्यार्थम् । तथा च याज्ञवल्क्यः ।

- नीचाभिगमनं गर्भपातनं भर्तृहिंसनम् ।

- विशेषपतनीयानि स्त्रीणाम् एतान्य् अपि ध्रुवम् ॥ (य्ध् ३.२९८)

**वसेयुः** स्व**गृहान्तिके** प्रधानगृहान् निष्कास्य कुटीगृहे वासयितव्येत्य् **अन्तिक**ग्रहणम् । 

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः- प्रायश्चित्तं तु कुर्वतीनाम् एतद् देयं न त्व् अन्यथा । 

- <u>तद् अयुक्तम्,</u> वस्त्रान्नदानव्यवहारस्य तत्र योगत्वात् । प्रायश्चित्ते भिक्षाहारता पयोव्रतं चान्द्रायणविधिश् चेत्यादि । न च भैक्षाहारता चानेन विवर्तयितुं शक्या, वृत्तिविधानेन चरितार्थत्वात् । तस्माद् यस्याः प्रायश्चित्तेष्व् अनधिकारः अशक्ततयातिपुष्टतया[^३०७] वा तस्या अपि वस्त्रादिदानं कर्तव्यम् इति श्लोकर्थः ॥ ११.१८८ ॥


[^३०७]:
     M G: śakta-
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*This same method is to be adopted in the case of female outcasts*,’—of
women who have become outcasts.

Even in the case of such female outcasts as have not performed the
expiation, and to whom ‘water’ has been offered, in the manner of a dead
person,—food and clothing shall be supplied. Inasmuch as the text uses
the word ‘*dāna*,’ what is meant is that she is to receive just enough
food and clothing to keep her body, and she shall not be supplied with
any articles of luxury.

‘*Drink*’— From the very propriety of the case, this stands for *water*.
But, even if it was not supplied, she could get it in any quantities.
What is meant therefore by its mention is that the man supplying her
with it shall not do it in an affectionate manner.

Food and clothing also should be of the same inferior quality as the
drink. Says *Yājñavalkya* (1.70)—‘One should deprive the unchaste woman
of her rights, let her remain dirty, living on mere morsel of food,
despised, and sleeping on the ground.’

The conditions that render women ‘outcasts’ are the same as those in the
case of men. As for what has been said in connection with those who
procure abortions—‘in cases of abortion, the woman does not incur a
heavier guilt—etc., etc.’ what this means is only that both the man and
the woman are equally guilty, and it does not mean that in cases other
than this, the woman incurs a heavier guilt. Says Yājñavalkya
(3.298)—‘Intercourse with inferior men, abortion, and injuring the
husband are to be regarded as acts that degrade (render outcasts) women
in particular.’

‘*They shall live close to the house*’—What is meant by the phrase
‘close to the house’ is that they shall be turned out of the main
building and allowed to live in a separate hut.

Some people say that lodging close to the house is to be given to only
those who are performing the expiation, and not for others.

But this is not right. Because what is really meant is that the
supplying of food and clothing would be easier if she dwelt close by.
While during the time that she is undergoing the expiation, she would be
living on alms, or milk, or performing the *Cāndrāyaṇa* and other
penances. And the rule regarding living on alms cannot be regarded as
set aside by what is said in the present text; as the only purpose
served by the present text is to prescribe the means of subsistence.

From all this it follows that what the verse means is that food and
clothing, etc., have to be supplied also to that female outcast who,
either though incapacity or on account of some other cause, is not in a
position to perform the expiatory penance.—(188)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.260), which explains that this
prescribes the ‘Twelve Years’ Penance,’ halved in consideration of the
sex of the offender;—and that in reference to an *unintentioned*
offence.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 99).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (3.296).—‘This same rule has been declared to be
applicable to women who have become outcasts. They should however be
given a dwelling in the vicinity of the household, and should also
receive clothes, food and protection.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Āparārka, p. 1208).—‘Four kinds of women must be entirely
abandoned: One who has intercourse with her husband’s pupil, one who has
intercourse with her Guru, one who has killed her husband, and one who
has intercourse with a despicable person.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निगदव्याख्यातः श्लोकः ॥ ११.१८७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

189	Let him follow the same rule in the case of female outcasts; but clothes, food, and drink shall be given to them, and they shall live close to the (family-) house.
</details>
