+++
title = "197 व्रात्यानां याजनम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one sacrifices for apostates, or performs the obsequies of strangers, or malevolent rites, or the Ahīna sacrifice,—he wipes it off by three Kṛcchras.—(197)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**व्रात्याः** सावित्रीपतिताः । तेषां **व्रात्यानां** व्रात्यस्तोमः[^३१६] क्रतुर् विहितः । तेन ये **याजयन्ति** आर्त्विज्येनोपदेष्टृत्वेन च । **परेषां** मातापितृगुरुवर्जम् **अन्त्यकर्म** श्मशानादि । **अभिचारं** शेयनचिदादि[^३१७] । **अहीनं**[^३१८] च द्विरात्रादिकम्[^३१९] । **कृच्छ्रैर्** विशुध्यति । 


[^३१९]:
     M G: dvirātrikaṃ


[^३१८]:
     M G: ahīne


[^३१७]:
     M G: śeyananidhanādi


[^३१६]:
     M G: vrātyaḥ stomaḥ

- <u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आहुः । नायम् अभिचाराहीनयोर् यजमानस्य विधिः । कस्य तर्हि, ऋत्विजाम् । तथा च व्रात्यानां याजनम् इतीदृश एवाधिकारः । यजमानस्य तु विधिलक्षणाप्रवृत्तिस् तस्याः प्रतिषेधाभावे कुतः प्रायश्चित्तम् । 

- भवत्व् अहीने शास्त्रतः प्रवृत्तिः । श्येनादौ तु कथम् । न हि शत्रून् मारयेद् इति नोदनास्ति । किं तर्हि, यः शत्रोर् मारणं कामयते तेन तत्सिद्ध्यर्थं श्येनादि कर्तव्यम् । शत्रुमारणे च हिंसालक्षणाप्रवृत्तिः[^३२०] । सा च निषिद्धा- "न हिंस्यात् सर्वा भूतानि" इति । अहीनेष्व् अपि लिप्सात एव प्रवृत्तिः । फलकामस्य हि तत्राधिकारो भवति । न तु फलकामना तत्र निषिद्धा, नापि काम्यमानार्थनिष्पादको व्यापारः । इह तूभयं निषिद्धम् "न हिंस्यात्" इति मरणफलव्यापारेण न[^३२१] प्रवर्तितव्यम् । तत्फलं च श्येनादेर् एव । इह तु नास्ति निषेधः- "स्वर्गादिफलकर्म न[^३२२] कर्तव्यम्" इति ।


[^३२२]:
     M G: -karmaṇaḥ 


[^३२१]:
     M G omit: na


[^३२०]:
     M G: lipsālakṣaṇā-

- <u>केचिद्</u> आहुः । "वाक्शस्त्रं वै ब्राःमणस्य" (म्ध् ११.३२) इत्य् अभिचारिणीयाभिचारो ऽप्य् अनुज्ञायाम्नात एव । तुल्याव् अहीनाभिचारौ । तत्र ऋत्विजाम् एव प्रायश्चित्तं युक्तम् । 

- <u>ननु</u> च काम्यान्य् अपि निषिद्धानि-[^३२३] "कामात्मता न प्रशस्ता" (म्ध् २.२) इति । 


[^३२३]:
     M G: kāmyāny aniṣiddhāni

- <u>यस्</u> तस्य विषयः स तत्रैव व्याख्यातः । श्रुतिश् चाहीनतया याजनं कार्यम् इति । अभिचरणीयाभिचारे च यजमानस्यायुक्तम् ।

- <u>कथम्</u> ।

- <u>आम्नातं</u> यज् ज्योतिषो ऽभिचार्यन्ते । तद्वत् प्रायश्चित्तान्य्[^३२४] उक्तान्य् एव, अस्य अभिचरर्त्विग्विषये ऽभिचरणीयाभिचरे सविषयत्वात् । 


[^३२४]:
     M G: tadvidhiprāyaścittāny

- वैदिकेन जपहोमादिना शत्रोर् मारणम् अभिचारः ॥ ११.१९७ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

’*Apostates*’—Those who have fallen off from the *Sāvitrī*; for such
men, (*a*) if one performs the *Vrātyastoma*—which is a rite specially
prescribed for them,—either by officiating at it as a priest or by
directing it;—(*b*) or if he performs the ‘*obsequies*’— the rites
performed in the cremation-grounds—‘*for strangers*’—*i.e*., for persons
other than their parents or preceptor;—(*c*) or if he performs
‘*malevolent rites*’—such as the *Śyenacit* sacrifice and the like;—or
(*d*) if he performs the *Ahīna*. sacrifice;—he becomes pure by
performing ‘*three Kṛcchras*.’

Others hold that what is here laid down does not refer to the
*performer* of the ‘malevolent’ or ‘Ahīna’ sacrifices, but to those who
officiate as priests at these sacrifices. It is for this reason that
this same rule applies also to those who perform sacrifices for
apostates. As regards the performer himself, since he undertakes the
performance in obedience to the Vedic injunction of the sacrifices
concerned, how could they be liable to expiation for their act, so long
as the performance has not been forbidden?

“As regards the *Ahīna* sacrifice, it is possible that it may have been
undertaken in obedience to a Vedic injunction; but how can the same be
said regarding the *Śyena* and other malevolent rites? There is no such
injunction as that ‘one should kill his enemies’; all that the Veda says
is that—‘if one desires to encompass the death of his enemy, he should,
for that purpose, perform the Śyena and such malevolent rites.’ And to
the killing of an enemy one is prompted solely by impetuous desire, and
the entertaining of such desire has been forbidden, by such texts
as—‘one should not seek to injure any living creature.’ To the
performance of the *Ahīna* sacrifices also people are prompted solely by
impetuous desire; as only such people are entitled to it as entertain an
eager desire for a definite reward;—but (there is this difference that)
in this case neither the desire for the particular reward nor the action
leading up to that reward is one that is forbidden. While in the other
case in question (that of the Malevolent Rites), both are forbidden: as
the general prohibition ‘one should not injure living creatures’ means
that ‘one shall undertake an act that leads up to the death of a living
creature’; and it is such *death* which forms the result of the *Śyena*
and other malevolent rites. As regards the *Ahīna* on the other hand,
there is no such prohibition as that—^(‘)one should not undertake an act
that leads to heaven.’”

In answer to this, some people offer the following explanation:—It
having been declared (11.33) that ‘speech is the Brāhmaṇa’s weapon,’ the
encompassing of the death of an enemy by means of malevolent rites,
becomes sanctioned by it. So that the Ahīna and the Malevolent Rite
stand upon the same footing.

Thus then an expiation would appear to be necessary only for the priest
officiating at these sacrifices (and not for the *sacrificer* himself).

“As a matter of fact all acts done with a purpose have been forbidden by
the general text—selfishness is deprecated’ (2.2).”

What this text means we have explained under that verse itself.

As a matter of fact, in connection with the *Ahīna*, there may he some
Vedic texts sanctioning the act of officiating at it. As regards the
Malevolent Rite on the other hand, there is impropriety on the part of
the *sacrificer* also; as is indicated by such texts as—‘Those who kill
by means of the Jyotiṣ, etc., etc.’; and it is for this reason that
expiations also have been prescribed in this connection.

So far as the present verse is concerned however, it can he taken as
referring to the priests officiating at the Malevolent Rite.

‘*Malevolent Rite*,’ ‘*abhicāra*’ is the name given to the encompassing
of an enemy’s death by means of the repeating of sacred texts and the
offering of oblations, prescribed in the Veda.—(197)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 383);—in *Aparārka* (p.
1152), which explains ‘*antya karma*’ as the ‘*antyeṣṭi*,’ and adds that
this refers to one who does the acts on hire, and not merely with a
religious motive; and that it refers to the Brāhmaṇa who performs the
death-rites for the Kṣatriya and other castes;—the ‘*Ahīna*’ is the name
for all those *Ahargaṇa* sacrifices which begin with the ‘*Dvirātra*’
and end with the ‘*Dvādaśarātra*.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 429), as laying down
the expiation for officiating at sacrifices performed by those who
should not perform them;—and in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 917), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Antya karma*,’ the rites performed on the
cremation ground,—‘*pareṣām*,’ *non-sapiṇḍas* or *śūdras*,—in the case
of the former it is repetition that is reprehensible, and in that of the
latter, even the first act;—‘*abhicāra*,’ ‘murderous rite,’ is
reprehensible, when it is performed against one who has not done any
similar act against the man;—the ‘*Ahīna*’ is a particular kind of
sacrifice.

It is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 122);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 247), which says that, as ‘*hīna*’ means ‘unrighteous,’ ‘*ahīna*’
means ‘righteous,’ and hence what is forbidden is ‘magical rites against
righteous persons.’
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.197-198)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (54.25).—‘He who has knowingly offered a sacrifice for an
unworthy person, he who has performed the funeral rites for a stranger,
he who has practised magic rites, and he who has performed sacrifices of
the *Ahīna* class,—all these may rid themselves of their sin by
performing three *Kṛcchra* penances.’

*Āpastamba* (1.26.7).—‘He who has been guilty of conduct unworthy of an
Aryan, of calumniating others, of actions contrary to the rules of
conduct, of eating or drinking forbidden things, of connection with a
woman of the Śūdra caste, of an unnatural crime, of performing magic
rites, shall bathe and sprinkle himself with water, reciting the seven
verses addressed to *Apas*, or those addressed to Varuṇa,......... in
proportion to the frequency with which the crime has been committed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.289).—‘One who performs sacrifices for an Apostate, one
who performs magic rites for encompassing the death of some person, one
who misuses the Veda, or one who abandons a person who has sought his
protection, should perform three *Kṛcchra* penances and subsist upon
barley for one year.’
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परेषाम् असंबन्धानाम् इत्य् अर्थः । तथा चोक्तम्-



> गुरोः प्रेतस्य शिष्यस् तु पितृमेधं समाचरन् ।  
> प्रेताहारैः समं तत्र दशरात्रेण शुध्यति ॥ इति ।

याजनाधिकाराच् चाभिचाराहीनयोर् अपि याजनार्थं वचनम् । न त्व् आत्मार्थे प्रतिषेधः । एवं च श्रुतिर् "अहीनयाजनम् अकार्यम्" इति । अनभिचरणीयाभिचारे चैतत् प्रायश्चित्तम् । तथा चोक्तो ऽभिचरणीयाभिचारः, "वाक्शस्त्रं वै ब्राह्मणस्य तेन हन्याद् अरीन् द्विजः" इति ॥ ११.१९६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

198	He who has sacrificed for Vratyas, or has performed the obsequies of strangers, or a magic sacrifice (intended to destroy life) or an Ahina sacrifice, removes (his guilt) by three Krikkhra (penances).
</details>
