+++
title = "211 त्र्यहम् प्रातस्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The twice-born, who is performing the Prājāpatya, shall eat in the morning for three days, then in the evening for three days, then for three days food got unasked, and for the next three days he shall not eat.—(211)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद्य् अप्य् अहर्मुखं **प्रातस्** तथापि पूर्वाह्णकालो लक्ष्यते । द्वितीयाह्नकालप्रतिषेधाद् अस्य । **प्रातः**कालविधौ हि यदृच्छया भोजनं प्राप्तं वर्तते । केवलम् अत्यर्थं हि "यत् पूर्वाह्ने वा मध्यंदिने वा मनुष्याणाम्" इत्य् अयाचितत्वात् प्राप्तम् अर्थित्वाद् भोजनम् । तद् एव चेत् प्रातःकाले विधीयते तदा माध्यंदिनं निवर्तेत, न सायंतनम् । अद्य पुनर् यद् एव पौरस्त्यं पूर्वाह्णमधंदिनकालयोर् विकल्पितयोः प्राप्तं भोजनं तद् एव पुनर् उच्यमानं कालान्तरनिवृत्त्यर्थं संपद्यते । व्रतत्वाच् चैतद् एव युक्तम् । एकाहारता हि व्रतपरिगणनायां संख्यायते । तपश् चेदं तापयति दुःखयतीति । यदि च द्वितीयं भोजनं निवर्तते तत्र सायंतनं निवर्तेत । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु "हविष्यान् प्रातराशान्" (ग्ध् २६.२) इति स्वप्लपरिमाणता भोजनस्य लक्ष्यत इत्य् आहुः । प्रातराशे हि स्वल्पं भुञ्जते ।[^३३७] तच्छीलाः प्राकृतपुरुषाः । तथा सिद्धे पाके भोजनात् प्राकृतभोक्तेति व्यपदिशन्ति[^३३८] । 


[^३३८]:
     M G: bhojanaṃ prāptaṃ bhuktveti vyapadiśati


[^३३७]:
     M G add: yat

- **सायम्** इति वापरस्मिन् त्र्यहे ।

- ततो ऽनतरं त्र्यहो हविष्यं वैदिकं[^३३९] यावद् भुज्यते तावद् अनुज्ञायते । उक्तं च स्मृतिकारैः "ईषत् भुक्त्वार्थं संविशेत्"[^३४०] । **अयाचिते** ऽपि हविष्यभोजनम् एककालिकं च । स्वगृहे ऽपि "दीयतां मे भोजनम्" इति यत् भृत्यादय आज्ञायन्ते तद् अपि याचितम् एव । प्रार्थनामात्रं याञ्चा, प्रेषणाध्येषणयोः साधारणम् । अतः स्वगृहे ऽपि यद्[^३४१] भार्यादयो ऽननुज्ञाता उपहरन्ति तथा भोक्तव्यम्, न त्व् अन्यथेति ॥ ११.२११ ॥


[^३४१]:
     M G: yadi


[^३४०]:
     M G: saṃviśeṣāt


[^३३९]:
     M G: 'natarāṃ tathā hastivedikāyāṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though it is the opening of the day that is called ‘*morning*,’ yet here
the term stands for the *forenoon*.

This rule regarding eating *in the morning* precludes eating at random.
It is only at midday that such random meals could be obtained unasked
from people who would offer such meals in accordance with the rule that
‘gifts to men shall be made at midday.’ If this could be laid down as to
he done in the *morning*, then the midday meal would be precluded, but
not the evening meal. Thus between the two optional meals—of the morning
and the midday—if one of them is further emphasised, the other becomes
excluded. And this would be only right, since it is a penance that is
prescribed here;—taking a single meal during the day having been
mentioned among ‘penances.’ And it is also a ‘*tapas*,’ an austerity, in
the sense that it *causes inconvenience*, ‘*tāpayati*.’ If the second
meal were to be precluded, it would be the evening meal that would be
so.

Others have held that when the text says that one should have
sacrificial food in the morning,’ what is meant is that only *a small
quantity* of food shall be taken. Because people who are in the habit of
an early breakfast have only a light meal in the morning, and when the
man hikes his meal only when the cooking has been finished, he is said
to be an ‘ordinary eater.’

‘*In the evening*’—during the next three days.

After that, for three days, he is to live upon ‘sacrificial food’; since
writers on Smṛti have declared that—‘Having oaten a little one should
retiro to rest.’ In the case of eating ‘*food got unasked*,’ also, the
food shall consist of ‘sacrificial food’ and shall be taken once only.
In one’s own house also, when food is obtained by ordering the servants
to ‘fetch food,’—it is food got *after asking* (not ‘unasked’), as
‘asking’ stands for any form of *request*, and is equally applicable to
*orders* and *requests* also. So that in one’s own house also the man
shall eat only that which his wife and others bring to him without his
asking for it,—and not anything else.—(211)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 25), as
describing the form of the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ penance;—again on p. 460 to
the same effect;—in the *Madanapārijāta* (p. 710);—in *Aparārka* (p.
1236);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 481 and p. 541);—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p.
508);—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 781).
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (26.1-5).—‘Now we shall describe the *Kṛcchras*. During three
days, he shall eat at the morning-meal, sacrificial food, and fast in
the evening. Next he shall eat sacrificial food during another period of
three days, in the evening. Next, during another period of three days,
he shall not ask anything for food. Next, he shall fast during another
period of three days.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.238).—‘Eating during three days in the morning only,
during the next three days in the evening only, subsisting during
another three days on food given unasked, and fasting during three
days,—that is a *Kṛcchra* penance.’

Do. (4.5.6-7).—‘The *Kṛcchra* penance revealed by Prajāpati lasts twelve
days, which are divided into four separate periods of three days; during
the first period of three days, he eats in the day-time only; during the
second, at night only; during the third, he subsists on food given
without asking; and during the fourth, he lives on air. If one eats one
day in the morning only, and on the following day at night only; on the
next day, food given without asking; and on the fourth day, subsists on
air, and repeats this three times,—that is called *the Kṛcchra penance
of children*.’

*Āpastamba* (1.27.7).—‘The rule for the *Kṛcchra* penance of twelve days
is the following:—For three days he must not eat in the evening, and
then for three days, not in the morning; for three days he must live on
food given unasked; and for three days he must not eat anything.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.20).—‘During three days, he eats in the daytime only; and
during the next three days, at night only; he subsists during another
period of three days, on food offered without asking; and finally, he
fasts during three days. That is a *Kṛcchra* penance.’

*Viṣṇu* (46.10).—‘Let a man for three days eat in the evening only; for
another three days in the morning only; for further three days, food
given unsolicited; and let him fast entirely for three days;—that is the
*Prājāpatya*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.320).—‘When the *Pāda-Kṛcchra* is in some way repeated
threefold, it is called Prājāpatya. \[ *Pāda-Kṛcchra* being that in
which the man eats once only during the day and night on one day, on the
next day at night only, on the third day, food got unasked, and on the
fourth day he fasts\].’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	A twice-born man who performs (the Krikkhra penance), revealed by Pragapati, shall eat during three days in the morning (only), during (the next) three days in the evening (only), during the (following) three days (food given) unasked, and shall fast during another period of three days.
</details>
