+++
title = "221 एतद् रुद्रास्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Rudras, Ādityas and the Maruts, along with the Great Sages, have performed this penance, for deliverance from all evils.—(221)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एतच्** चान्द्रायणं **व्रतं** सर्वे देवाः समाचेरुः, **सर्वेषाम् अकुशलानां विमोक्षाय** । न केवलं यत्रैवोक्तम् अनुक्तेत्ष्व् अपि द्रष्टव्यम् । तद् उक्तम् "कृच्छ्रातिकृच्छ्रौ चान्द्रायणम् इति सर्वप्रायश्चित्तम् सर्वप्रायश्चित्तम्"[^३४७] (ग्ध् १९.२०) ।


[^३४७]:
     M G: sarvaprāyaścittāni, and omits the repetition

- <u>अत्रेदं</u> संदिह्यते । यद् एतत् सर्वप्रायश्चित्तवचनं किं तन्त्रेण सर्वेषां शोधनम् उत योगसिद्धिन्यायेन प्रतिनिमित्तम् आवर्तत इति । 

- <u>उच्यते</u> । यद्य् अप्य् एतन् न्याय्यं निमित्तावृत्तौ नैमित्तिकावृत्तिर् इति तथापीदम् अनाम्नातप्रतिपदप्रायश्चित्तनिमित्तेष्व् असंविदितेषु कृतसंभावनायाम् आम्नायते । तत्र येषां तावत् संभावनामात्रेण शुद्धिः क्रियते, यथा[^३४८] "संवत्सरस्यैकम् अपि" (म्ध् ५.२१) इति, तत्र निमित्तस्यानिश्चितत्वाद् उपपत्तेः कुत आवृत्तिसंभवः । यथा सुप्तस्य परिवर्तनैः शय्यागतसूक्ष्मप्राणिवधस् तथा नगरस्य रथ्यासु भ्राम्यतः परस्त्रीमुखसंदर्शनम् आ गृहप्राप्तेर् असकृत् संभवति । तादृग्विषये तन्त्रभाव एव युक्तः । दर्शितं चैतत् "अस्थन्वताम्" (ग्ध् २२.२०) इत्यादौ समुदायवध एकं प्रायश्चित्तम् इति । यानि च गरीयांसि पापानि तत्र सर्वत्र प्रायश्चित्तान्य् आम्नातानि । इदं च यथाप्रदर्शित एव विषये भवितुम् अर्हति । महत्त्वाच् चानावृत्तौ न्याय्यम् । तस्मात् संशितेष्व् अपि कथंचित् प्रायश्चित्तेषु न निमित्तान्तरोत्पत्तौ युक्त एव तन्त्रभावः । तथा च तन्त्रधर्म एव न्याय्य इति दर्शयति- "यद् दिवा च नक्तं चैनश् चकृम तस्यावयजनम् असि स्वाहा । यत् स्वपन्तश् च जाग्रतश् चैनश् चकृम तस्यावयजनम् असि स्वाहा । यद् विद्वांसः" (प्ब् १.६.१०) इत्यादि । यद् इति च वीप्सायां युगपद् अशेषपापवर्जनम् ॥ ११.२२१ ॥


[^३४८]:
     M G: tathā

_अत्र वदन्ति_ ।
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

All the gods have performed this penance, ‘*for deliverance from all
evils*.’

What this means is that this penance is to be performed, not only in
connection with the offences specified above, but in other cases also;
as it has been declared (by Gautama, 19.20)—‘The Kṛcchra, the Ātikṛcchra
and the Cāndrāyaṇa constitute the ‘*universal expiation*.’

In this connection there arises the question—“When the text speaks of
the *universal expiation*, does it mean that a single performance of
these atones for all sins? Or that they are to be repeated with each
sin?”

The answer to this is as follows:—The reasonable view would be that the
effect (in the shape of the expiation) should be repeated with the cause
(the sin); but what the assertion in question refers to are those sins
in regard to each of which no specific expiation has been prescribed, or
those whose commitment may be only suspected, and not definitely
ascertained;—now when the atonement is meant to be for such sins as are
only suspected to have been committed,—when for instance, one is
performing the *Kṛcchra* in accordance with what has been declared (in
Manu, 5.21) to the effect that ‘for the atonement of unknown sins one
should perform the *Kṛcchra* at least once a year,’—inasmuch as the
cause (the sin) would be uncertain, how could there be any repetition of
the expiation with each individual offence? For instance, when one is
turning his sides during sleep, he may kill several small creatures on
the bed, or when he is walking on the road, he may look at the face of
several women, till he reaches home;—in such cases the only right view
could be that one performance of the expiation should atone for all
these several offences. This has been explained by us under the text,
dealing with the expiation for the killing of ‘boneless creatures’
(140), where it has been shown that there is a single expiation for all
the offences collectively. When, however, the offences concerned are
grave ones,—we find distinct expiation prescribed in connection with
each. But what Gautama has prescribed can apply to only such
(unspecified) cases as have been mentioned above; and as the expiation
is a heavy one, it would not he reasonable to prescribe it except in the
case of repetitions. In the case of a number of suspected sins also, if
no other definite offence intervenes, it would be only right to regard
the single performance of the expiation as atoning for the whole lot of
them. The following passage also shows that a single performance should
do for a number of offences—‘Whatever sin I may have committed during
the night and during the day, what I may have done while I was awake and
while I was sleeping, etc., etc.,’—when the repetition of the term
‘*what*’ has been taken to mean that all the sins are atoned for
collectively.—(221)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (3.8.30).—‘By the *Cāndrāyaṇa* the sages of old purified
themselves and accomplished their objects. That rite procures wealth,
spiritual merit, sons, cattle, long life, heavenly bliss and fame; it
secures the fulfilment of all desires.’

*Viṣṇu* (47.10).—‘After having performed this penance, in a former age,
the seven holy sages, Brahmā and Rūdra acquired a splendid abode.’
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

222	The Rudras, likewise the Adityas, the Vasus and the Maruts, together with the great sages, practised this (rite) in order to remove all evil.
</details>
