+++
title = "238 यद् दुस्तरम्"

+++

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What is hard to traverse, what is hard to attain, what is hard to reach, and what is hard to do,—all this is accomplished by Austerity; as Austerity is irrepressible.—(238)
</details>

<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

दुःखेन यत् तीर्यते तद् **दुस्तरम्** । व्याधिनिमित्ता महत्य् आपत् । अतिबलेन शत्रूणां यद् उपरोधः । एतद् अपि तपस्विनां सुसाध्यम् । कृच्छ्रेण यत् प्राप्यते तद् **दुरापम्** आकाशगमनादि । **दुर्गं** मेघपृष्ठारोहणादि । **दुष्करम्** अभिशापवरदानादि, अन्यथा त्व् अकरणम् । यथा संवर्तस्यान्यदेवतासृष्टिः । **सर्वम्** एव **तपसा सिध्यति** । श्लोकत्रयेण संयोगपृथक्त्वाद् अभ्युदयार्थता कृच्छ्राणाम् उच्यते । 

- <u>ननु</u> च प्रायश्चित्तानां प्रकृतत्वात् कृच्छ्रस्तुतिस् तच्छेषतयैव न्याय्या, नाभ्युदयार्थिनो विधेयतया । न च दुस्तरादयो ऽर्थवादतया न संभवन्ति । एवंविधाः महान्तः कृच्छ्रा यद् दुस्तरम् अपि समुद्रादि तीर्यते । किं पुनर् पापं[^३६९] नापनोत्स्यते । 


[^३६९]:
     M G: duṣprāpaṃ

- <u>उच्यते</u> । गृह्यस्मृतिषु सामविधौ चाननुक्रम्यैव प्रायश्चित्तानि[^३७०] कृच्छ्रविधिः समाम्नातः । तत्र चानारभ्याधीतत्वाद् युक्तैव अभ्युदयार्थता । आह च "अथैतान् कृच्छ्रांश् चरित्वा सर्वेषु वेदेषु स्नातो भवति सर्वैर् देवैर्[^३७१] ज्ञातो भवति" (ग्ध् २६.२४) इति । "वेदेषु स्नातः"[^३७२] इत्य् अनेन नियमपूर्वकं वेदाध्ययनानुष्ठानाद् यत् फलं तत् सिद्धम् आह । यस् तु निष्फलो ग्रहणार्थो ऽध्ययनविधिः स एकवेदाध्ययनेनात्रापि संपद्यते । एवम् अनेकवेदाध्ययनं तु धर्मायैवेत्य् उक्तम् । "देवैर्[^३७३] ज्ञातः" इत्य् अनेनाशेषयागफलावाप्तिम् आह । यजमानो हि वेदैर् ज्ञायते । यो ह्य् अर्थवादतया संभवति, न प्रायश्चित्तैर् दानभावं[^३७४] गच्छद्भिः । इहापि स्वधर्मनिवृत्तिम् आशङ्कमानेन "ब्राह्मणस्य तपो ज्ञानम्" (म्ध् ११.२३५) इति यद् उक्तं तद् अभ्युदयार्थत्वे संभवति । न प्रायश्चित्तानि पापप्रमोचनार्थानि काम्यानि फलसाधनानि, तत्र भिन्नविषयत्वात् कुतः प्रायश्चित्तैर् निवृत्तिर् आशङ्क्यते । अभ्युदयार्थत्वे तु कृच्छ्राणाम् अन्येषां च कर्मणां तुल्यत्वाद् युक्ता निवृत्त्याशङ्का । तथा "महापतकिनश् च" (म्ध् ११.२३९) इति पापप्रमोचनार्थे ऽपि[^३७५] चोद्यते **यद् दुस्तरम्** इत्यादिना अभ्युदयार्थतेति भिन्ने एव ते वाक्ये । तेन च प्रकरणस्य बाधो युक्त एव । तथा च द्वैपायनमुनिप्रभृतयः "तपःप्रभावाद् बुद्धीर् विचित्रास् ता वक्ष्यन्ते" । तस्मात् सर्वफलानि तपांसि । न च यथा सर्वार्थान्य् अपि वैदिकानि कर्माणि नियतफलानि "सर्वेभ्यो दर्शपूर्णमासौ सर्वेभ्यो ज्योतिष्टोमः" इत्यधिकारात् तत्र सर्वत्र यान्य् एव वेदे स्वर्गादीनि फलानि श्रुतानि तदपेक्षयैव सर्वार्थता न तु ऋध्यतिशयातिभोगेनैवम् इति । किं तर्हि, **यद् दुस्तरम्** इत्यादि यथा निदर्शितम् ॥ ११.२३८ ॥


[^३७५]:
     J: pāpapramocanārthāpi


[^३७४]:
     M G: prāyaścittānidānabhāvaṃ


[^३७३]:
     M G: vedeṣu


[^३७२]:
     M G: jñātaḥ


[^३७१]:
     M G omit: snāto bhavati sarvair devair


[^३७०]:
     M G: prāyaścittānāṃ
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Hard to traverse*’— that which can be traversed with difficulty;
*e.g*., some great trouble due to illness, or to attack by a powerful
enemy. All this is easily met by ascetics.

‘*Hard to attain*’— that which is got with difficulty; *e.g*., the power
to fly in the sky and so forth.

‘*Hard to reach*’—*e.g*., riding on the back of clouds and so forth.

‘*Hard to do*’—*e.g*., the granting of boons and pronouncing of curses;
the reversing of these; as for instance Saṃvarta created another set of
divine beings.

All this is accomplished by Austerity.

These three verses describe the fact that the *Kṛcchra* penances are
conducive to all kinds of prosperity and advancement

“Inasmuch as the injunction of expiations forms the subject-matter of
the present context, any praises bestowed upon *Kṛcchra* must be taken
as supplementary to that injunction; and it would not be right to take
them as actually enjoining the penance itself as leading to prosperity.
Nor is it impossible to take the present verse as a purely commendatory
declamation,—the sense being—‘the Kṛcchra penances are so very effective
that what is hard to traverse, such as the ocean and the like, become
traversed by their means, wherefore then could they not wipe off sins?”

Our answer to this is as follows:—In the *Gṛhyasūtras* and the
*Sāmavidhāna*, we find the *Kṛcchra* enjoined without reference to
expiation; so that: since such injunctions of the penance are not in the
wake of any other enjoined act, the penance can certainly be taken as
leading to prosperity and advancement. It has also been declared
that—‘Having performed these *Kṛcchra* penances, one becomes
accomplished in all Vedas, and becomes recognised by all the gods.’
(*Gautama*, 20. 24). What is meant by ‘becoming accomplished in the
Vedas’ is that the performer obtains that reward which is obtainable by
the proper study, according to prescribed rules, of the Veda. This
injunction that we have of the study of Veda, without reference to
rewards, becomes fulfilled by the study of even a single Veda; so that
when several Vedas are studied, this can only be regarded as bringing
about special *merit*. The expression ‘becomes recognised by all the
gods’ means that he obtains the results obtainable from the performance
of all the sacrifices; if is only when a man performs sacrifices that he
becomes ‘recognised by the gods,’ and not by performing *expiations*,
which partake of the nature of *gifts* (not sacrifices). Further, what
has been said in the present work in connection with the statement that
‘for the Brāhmaṇa, Austerity is knowledge’ (236),—which was suspected of
implying the omission by the Brāhmaṇa of all his duties,—is possible
only if the penance in question be regarded as conducive to prosperity
and advancement. As for expiations, they are meant to remove sins; they
are not of the nature of acts performed for the attainment of desirable
results; so that the scope of the two sets of acts being different, how
could anything said in regard to expiations be suspected of leading to
the omission of duties? If, on the other hand, the Kṛcchra penances were
conducive to prosperity and advancement, they would stand on the same
footing as other acts tending to the same end; and it would be natural
to suspect the omission of these latter. Thus we conclude that while the
next verse speaks of these penances as destructive of sins, the present
one speaks of them as conducive to prosperity and advancement; and these
two sentences stand apart from each other; and it is only light that
what is asserted by means of the ‘sentences’ should set aside what is
only indicated by the context, it is in this sense that we have the
following declaration of Dvaipāyana and other sages—‘By the force of
Austerities, powerful intellect and other excellences are acquired.’

From all this it follows that Austerities are conducive to all kinds of
desirable results. In the case of the Vedic rituals, though it has been
declared that ‘the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifices are conducive to *all
results*, the *Jyotiṣṭoma* is conducive *to all results*,’ yet, from the
very nature of persons undertaking the performance of these rites, the
term ‘all’ in this declaration is taken as standing only *for all those
results that have been declared as following from these sacrifices*, and
not actually *all* results in the literal sense of the term. But in the
case in question it is not so; what is said in the present verse has to
be taken as literally true.—(238)
</details>

<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 11.234-244)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
11.234].
</details>

<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ग्रहनक्षत्रवैषम्यनिमित्ता आपद् **दुस्तरा** । **दुरापं** चान्तर्धानावेशाकाशगमनाद्यैश्वर्यजीवितैव । **दुर्गं** च यद् दुरार्छं (?) स्वर्गादि । **यच् च दुष्करं** कृत्स्नसमुद्रपानमृतसंजीवनाद्य् अगस्त्यजमदग्निप्रभृतीनां तत् सर्वं तपसा शक्यम् इति । सेयम् उक्तस्य सामर्थ्येन प्रायश्चित्ततपःस्तुतिर् एव प्रकरणसामर्थ्याद् विज्ञेया । येन ॥ ११.२३५–२३६ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

239	Whatever is hard to be traversed, whatever is hard to be attained, whatever is hard to be reached, whatever is hard to be performed, all (this) may be accomplished by austerities; for austerity (possesses a power) which it is difficult to surpass.
</details>
