+++
title = "02 अधश्चोर्ध्वम्"

+++
15.2 Sakhah, the branches, as it were; tasya, of that Tree; prasrtah,
extending; adhah, downwards, from the human beings to the immobile
(trees etc.); ca, and; urdhvam, upwards, upto Brahma-beginning from the
Creator of the Cusmos to Dharma (Death) \[According to A.G. 'human
beings' stands for the world of human beings, and 'Brahma ' for the
'world of Brahma' (Satva-loka). So Dharma may mean the 'world of Death'
(pitr-loka).-Tr.\], which, 'in accordance with their work and in
conformity with their knowledge' (Ka. 2.2.7), are the results of
knowledge and actions; are guna-pravrddhah, strengthened, made stout, by
the alities sattva, rajas and tamas, which are their materials; and
visaya-pravalah, have the sense-objects as their shoots. The
sense-objects (sound etc.) sprout, as it were, like new leaves from the
branches (bodies etc.) which are the results of actions. Thery the
branches are said to have sense-objects as their shoots. The supreme
Root, the material cause of the Tree of the World, has been stated
earlier. And now, the latent impressions of attraction, repulsion, etc.
born of the results of action are the subsidiary roots, as it were,
which grow later on and become the cause of involvement in righteousness
and and unrighteousness. And those mulani, roots; karma-anubandhini,
which are followed by actions; anu-santatani, spread, enter; adhah,
downwards, as compared with the world of gods; manusya-loke, into the
world of human beings particularly-for it is well known that (only) here
men have competence for rites and duties. They (these roots) are said to
be karma-anubandhini since actions (karma) that are characterized as
righteous and unrighteous follow as their product (anubandha), (i.e.)
succeed the rise of those (attraction, repulsion, etc.).
