+++
title = "07 ममैवांशो जीवलोके"

+++
15.7 It is eva, verily amsah, a part, portion, limb, fragment-these are
all synonymous; mama, of mine, of the supreme Self; \[Here Ast. adds
'narayanasya, of Narayana':-Tr.\] which, jiva-bhutah sanatanah, becoming
the eternal individual soul, will known as the enjoyer and agent;
jiva-loke, in the region of living beings, (i.e.) in the world-. As the
sun (reflected) in water is a part of the (actual) sun, and goes to the
sun itself and does not return when the water, the cause of the
reflection, is removed, so also even this part becomes similarly united
with that very Self; or, as space enclosed in a pot etc., delimited by
such adjuncts as the pot etc., being a part of Space does not return
after being united with Space when the cause (of limitation), viz pot
etc., is destroyed. This being so, it has been rightly stated, 'by
reaching which they do not return.' Objection: How can the partless
supreme Self have any limb, fragment or part; If it has limbs, then
there arises the contingency of Its becoming destroyed through the
dismemberment of the limbs! Reply: This fault does not arise, since Its
fragment, which is delimited by an adjunct arising out of ignorance, is
imagined to be a part, as it were. And this idea has been fully
explained in the chapter (13) dealing with the 'field'. How that
individual soul, imagined as a part of Mine, enters into the world and
leaves the body are being stated: Karsati, it draws to itself;
indriyani, the (sense-) organs-ear etc.; manah-sasthani, which have the
mind as their sixth; and prakrti-sthani, which abide in Nature, which
are located in their respective spheres such as the orifice of the ear
etc. When (does it draw the organs);
