+++
title = "12 यदादित्यगतन् तेजो"

+++
15.12 Yat, that which is; aditya-gatam, in the sun, which abides in the
sun;-what is that-the tejah, light, brilliance, radiance; which
bhasayate, illumines, reveals; akhilam, the whole, entire; jagat, world;
yat, that ulluminating light which is; candramasi, in the moon; ca, and
yat, which is; agnau, in fire, the carrier of oblations; viddhi, know;
tat, that; tejah, light; to be mamakam, Mine. That light belong to Me
who am Visnu. Or: The light that is Consciousness, which is in the sun,
which is in the moon, and which is in fire, know that light to be Mine.
That light belongs to Me who am Visnu. Objection; Is it not that the
light that is Consciousness exists eally in the moving and the
non-moving; Such being the case, why is this particular mention, 'That
light in the sun which৷৷.,'etc; Reply: This defect does not arise,
because, owing to the abundance of the sattva ality, there can be an
abundane \[Ast. reads avistaratva (amplitude) in place of adhikya.-Tr.\]
(of Consciousness). Since in the sun etc. the sattva is very much in
evidence, is greatly brilliant, therefore there is an abundance of the
light (of Consciousness) in them alone. And so it (sun etc.) is
specially mentioned. But it is not that it (Consciousness) is abundant
only there. Indeed, as in the world, a face, though in the same
position, is not reflected in wood, a wall, etc., but in a mirror etc.
it is reflected according to the degree in which they are more and more
transparent, so is it here. Further,
