+++
title = "15 सर्वस्य चाहम्"

+++
15.15 And aham, I, as the Self; san-nivistah, am seated; hrdi, in the
hearts, in the intellects; sarvasya, of all creatures. Therefore, with
regard to all the creatures, mattah, from Me, from the Self; are Smrtih,
memory; jnanam, knowledge; and their apohanam, loss. The knowledge and
memory of these creatures who perform good deeds come from Me in
accordance with the good deeds; similarly, the loss, deterioration, of
memory and knowledge of those who perform evil deeds comes from Me in
accordance with the evil deeds. Aham eva, I alone, the supreme Self; am
the vedyah, object to be known; sarvaih, through all; vedaih, the Vedas.
I am also the vedanta-krt, the originator of the Vedanta, i.e., the
source of the traditional school of the teachings of Vedanta; and aham
eva, I Myself; am the veda-vit, knower of the Vedas, the knower of the
teachings of the Vedas. In the verses beginning with, 'That light in the
sun which৷৷.' (12), etc. have been stated briefly the majesty of God,
the Lord called Naravana, which arise from special limiting adjuncts.
Now then, the succeeding verses are begun with a view to determining the
real nature of that very Lord as the Unconditioned and Absolute, by
distinguishing Him from the limiting adjuncts, (viz) the mutable and the
immutable. In that connection, after dividing into three parts \[The two
limiting adjuncts-the mutable and the immutable-, and the supreme
Self.\] all the teachings of the preceding and the immediately
succeeding chapters, the Lord says:
