+++
title = "42 अथवा बहुनैतेन"

+++
10.19-42 Hanta te etc. upto jagat sthitah. I am the Soul etc. (verse 20)
: By this \[the Bhagavat\] wards off the exclusion \[of any being as
different form Him\]. Otherwise the sentences like 'Of the immovable \[I
am\] the the Himalayas' (verse 25) etc., would amount to the exclusive
statement that the Himalayan range is the Bhagavat and not any other
one. In that case, the indiscriminateness of the Brahman is not
established and hence the realisation of the Brahman would be a partial
(or conditioned) one. For, the \[present\] text of exposition is
intended for that seeker whose mind cannot contemplate on the
all-pervasiveness \[of the Brahman\], but who \[at the same time\] is
desirous of realising that \[all-pervasiveness\]. Hence, while
concluding, \[the Bhagavat\] teaches the theory of duality-cumunity by
saying 'whatsoever being exists with the manifesting power' etc., and
then concludes the topic with the theory of absolute unity, as 'Or what
is the use of this elaboration;I remain pervading this \[universe\]
by a single fraction \[of Myself\] This has been declared indeed \[in
the scriptures\] as : 'All beings constitute \[only\] His one-fourth;
His \[other\] immortal three-forths are in the heaven.' (Rgveda, X, xc,
3). Thus, all this and the prime cause of creatures, are nothing but the
Bhagavat (Absolute). And hence, He Himself becomes the object of
knowledge of all, but being comprehended with the different strange
alities.
