+++
title = "19 तपाम्यहमहं वर्षम्"

+++
9.16-19 Ahim kratuh etc. upto Arjuna. The Brahman-being is of course
only one and admits of no parts. The action also depends only on the
assumed \[or not real\] causes. Hence, it accomplishes the aloneness (or
oneness) of the Brahman. For, if it is performed with the realisation
that all the different causes are nothing but the Self, then the action
is not far away from reaching the Bhagavat. That has also been stated -
'This self same action-power of Siva, if it exists in the ignorant,
binds \[him\]; the same power, when it is realised that it is a path to
his own Self \[Siva\], then it leads to the goal (the Lord).' (SpK, III,
16). I have myself (Ag.) stated elsewhere as : The intellect that
confirms, in the beginning, to \[the duality of\] the beings and the
non-beings; the same intellect does not conform, at the time of
withdrawl, to \[the duality of\] the beings and the non-beings. This
subject has been discussed in detail in different places. Hence let us
stop \[the present discussion\] here. I give heat etc. This is said in
the context of discussing the One that admits no duality. But if the
Brahman can be attained by means of external sacrifices also, then, is a
different god (different from Vasudeva) worshipped in the sacrifices
like the Agnistoma ; If it is admitted, then it would lead to the
doctrine of duality. If \[on the other hand\] it is Vasudeva Himself,
the how is it that emancipation is not attained by the performence \[of
these sacrifices\] ; Therefore it is stated -
