+++
title = "26 पत्रम् पुष्पम्"

+++
9.23-26 Ye' pi etc. upto prayatatmanah. Even those who worship \[gods\]
with other names, they too \[in fact\] worship Me alone, becaue there is
nothing (no god) to be worshipped apart from the Brahman. But the
difference is that \[they do so\] by non-injunction. Non-injunction :
different injunctions. \[This amounts to saying that\] having the innate
nature of the Absolute Brahman-Existence, I am indeed worshipped by
manifold injunctions (i.e., sacrifices enjoined by injunctions). But
non-injunction should not be explained as 'by defective injunction' as
it has been done by others (other commentators), who acire dirts of
great sins by insulting other systems of philosophy. If their view is
correct then the declarations that are actually found viz., 'They offer
sacrifice to Me alone', and 'I am alone the enjoyer of all sacrifices' -
all would be inconsistent. Enough of talk with the sinful ones. Our
preceptors, however, explain \[ye'pyanya-etc.\] as follows : Those who,
following the principle of the doctrine of duality consider certain
deity as different from their own Self and as devoid of the innate
nature of the Brahman, and offer sacrifice to that deity only-but it is
only to Me, their own Self that even those men offer their sacrifices,
however by non-injunction i.e. by faulty injunction of the nature of
duality-view. That is why \[the Lord\] says (in verse 25) 'They do not
recognise Me, their own Self, correctly as that deity itself, i.e., as
the enjoyer \[of the oblation of the sacrifice\]. Hence they move away
from My nature . Why ; By being votaries of gods, they attain the gods
etc. (verse 26). It amounts to say that this \[fact of attaining these
gods\] is itself nothing but moving away \[from Me, the Self\]. On the
other hand, those who realise My nature (i.e. Me) as being not different
\[from their Self\], they offer sacrifices to Me alone, even though
those sacrifices etc. are for the gods, goblins and manes.' \[The Lord\]
is going to conclude \[the present topic\] as : '(Thus) offering
sacrifice to Me they attain Me alone.' (IX-29,35). But that alone is
called a deity which is aimed at \[according to injunction\], for
offering things (i.e. oblation). Hence, how can a sacrifice be offered
to one's own Self, a category that cannot be aimed at ; For example,
there is the injunction: 'The oblation \[of rice\] of the rite prayana,
crooked in the milk, is intended for the deity Aditi'; and hence this
Aditi becomes the object intended \[in the sacrifice\], because that
particular deity is an adjunct of an injunction, and because it is
included in the injunction as one to be aimed at. But \[in the present
case\], there is no injunction that concerns the Self. Having \[these
objections\] in mind \[the Lord\] says : \[They offer sacrifice\] to Me
following non-injunction. The idea is this : An injunction is reired
only in the case of a deity that is different from one's own Self. For,
the injunction is one of the nature of imparting the knowledge only of
that particular thing which is not known \[otherwise\]. But, one's own
Self, the Absolute Lord, is known, not following any injunction. For,
the knowledge of the Self is not brought by injunction. Certainly no
action is undertaken not aiming the Self. Therefore in all cases \[of
offerings\], intended for the deities like Indra etc., this Self of
one's own is certainly intended , as the Self is, by nature, the
illuminator of the entire Universe; as It is like a thread in a garland;
and as It is illumining \[on Its own accord\], asserting Its superiority
\[over all others\] and only serving as a background (bhittih, 'a
screen', or 'a wall') of the manifestations of the deity so intended by
him \[in the sacrifice\]. Thus it is established by logic that even the
votaries of gods offer sacrifices to Me (the Absolute) alone, becuase
'I' depends on no injunction. As far as these sacrificers are concerned,
the principal effect of the sacrifice viz., attaining 'Me', is not
intended by them as their own. On the other hand, they are very much
satisfied with attaining the status of Indra etc., just as a priest is
satisfied with limited fees. To indicate this, the parasmaipada form
(yajanti) \[is used\]. For, it has been stated by myself (Ag.)
\[else-where\] as : 'One, who knows the Vedas and does not know \[to
intend for\] the status of (or the word) Sambhu (the Absolute), would
feel afflicted in despair. \[For\], aspiring for the heaven, and
\[hence\] rejecting the status of \[the actual\] performer of of
sacrifice (yajamana), \[but at the same time\] performing sacrifice for
others (yajan), he has become a \[mere\] priest in the sacrifice.
Indeed, the divergently flowing floods of taste for action, without
exception, - even though they flow from the Absolute consciousness - do
not bestow \[on the performer\] the mighty ocean of Bliss of one's own
Self if they do not gain a complete stability' Thus whosoever realises
in the said manner, his sacrifice, though aimed at the deities like
Indra, is in fact a sacrifice offered to the Absolute Lord. Whatever may
be the other actions of his, they too become acts of worshipping his own
Self, the Absolute Lord, as It alone is intended in all his action. This
\[the Lord\] says :
