+++
title = "34 मन्मना भव"

+++
9.32-34 Man hi etc; upto Matparayanah. Those who are of sinful birth :
I.e., the animals, birds, reptiles etc. Women denotes the ignorant. Men
of working class denotes those who find pleasure in different vocations,
like agriculture etc. Men of the fourth caste : those who do not have
any claim whatsoever for \[performing\] the Vedic rituals and whose
livelihood depend on others. By taking refuge \[solely\] in Me, even
these all attain Me alone. The deeds of the exceedingly compassionate
Bhagavat, like the one granting liberation to a chief of the elephants
are heard in thousands \[in the Puranas\]. Certainly it must be so, for
those whose behaviour is just the opposite to that of these persons.
Some (commentators\] declare : The present sentence \[of the Lord\]
intends to glorify the twice-born and members of the ruling class, and
it is not uttered with the intention of speaking of the attainment of
liberation in the case of the women etc. Indeed these persons \[aim to\]
break into pieces the Graceous-to-all Power of the Bhagavat by
foistering upon It, a limited applicability; likwise they do not
tolerate the profoundly compassionate nature of the Absolute Lord; they
contradict the \[Lord's own\] statements 'To Me none is hateful and none
is dear (IX, 30)', 'Even a highly evil-doer etc. (IX, 31)', and other
similar statements, very clearly of the same import; with all effort
they \[strive to\] bring in something indicative of duality even in the
Absolute-being, Whose non-dual nature has been well established firmly
by the diversity of the best reasonings; they are not mindful of other
contradictions \[that lurk in their theory\] with the revealed
literature; when simply estioned 'How is this ;' and 'How is that ;',
these persons, having their internal organ totally possessed by the
mighty devil of the caste \[considerations\], concealed within, and
having their tongue, face and eyes all twisted by their sense of
jealously, hypocrisy and shame-they prattle evil for the entire
humanity; and thus they put upon themselves the status of being an
object of ridicule. Therefore the above explanation \[of ours\] does
good to all.
